- I.1 The conduct of monetary policy has undergone fundamental changes and regime shifts all 
+ I.1 The     conduct of monetary policy has undergone fundamental changes and regime shifts all 
?        ++++

  over the world, mainly in response to the challenges and opportunities thrown up by structural 
  changes in economic activity as well as by financial liberalisation and its outcomes. A clearer 
  focus on price stability as a principal  though not necessarily the sole  objective of monetary 
  policy has evolved through a broad consensus. With the deregulation of financial markets and 
  globalisation, the process of monetary policy formulation has acquired a much greater market 
- orientation than ever before. This has been accompanied by institutional changes even as central 
?                                                                                          --------

+ orientation than ever before. This has been accompanied by institutional changes even as 
- banks have strived for operational autonomy in pursuit of their goals. 
+ central banks have strived for operational autonomy in pursuit of their goals. 
? ++++++++

  
  I.2 The global financial crisis and its aftermath have posed formidable challenges for central 
  banks and subjected their mandates to close scrutiny and re-evaluation in the face of 
  unprecedented financial instability. In advanced economies (AEs), this has necessitated use of 
  unconventional monetary policy tools including asset purchases and forward guidance. In the 
  case of emerging market economies (EMEs), the conduct of monetary policy has been 
  complicated by, inter alia, systemic externalities associated with monetary policies of advanced 
- economies. Consequently monetary policy in emerging countries has been required to contend 
+ economies.. Consequently monetary policy in emerging countries has been required to contend 
?          +

  not only with supply shocks but also to manage external shocks emanating from surges and ebbs 
- in capital flows, volatility in exchange rates and asset prices, and exit from their own (overly) 
+ in capital flows, volatility in exchange     rates and asset prices, and exit from their own (overly) 
?                                         ++++

  accommodative policies. 
  
+  
+ 
+  
+ 
  I.3 Indias monetary policy framework has undergone several transformations reflecting 
- underlying macroeconomic and financial conditions. In the post global financial crisis years 
?                                                            ^

+ underlying macroeconomic and financial conditions. In the pist global financial crisis years 
?                                                            ^

  particularly, there has been considerable debate around the monetary policy framework, 
- especially due to the coexistence of persistent high inflation and sluggish growth. 
+ especially due to the coexistence of persistent     high inflation and sluggish growth. 
?                                                 ++++

  
  I.4 Against this backdrop, Governor Dr. Raghuram G. Rajan, in a statement after assuming office 
- on September 4, 2013 observed that: 
+ on September 4,, 2013 observed that: 
?               +

  
- The primary role of the central bank, as the RBI Act suggests, is monetary stability, that is, to 
?                                                         -

+ The primary role of the central bank, as the RBI Act sugests, is monetary stability, that is, to 
  sustain confidence in the value of the countrys money. Ultimately, this means low and stable 
  expectations of inflation, whether that inflation stems from domestic sources or from changes in 
  the value of the currency, from supply constraints or demand pressures. I have asked Deputy 
  Governor Urjit Patel, together with a panel he will constitute of outside experts and RBI staff, to 
  come up with suggestions in three months on what needs to be done to revise and strengthen our 
- monetary policy framework. A number of past committees, including the FSLRC, have opined 
?                                                                                   -------

+ monetary policy framework. A number of past committees, including the FSLRC, have 
- on this, and their views will also be considered carefully. 
+ opined on this, and their views will also be considered carefully. 
? +++++++

  
- I.5 Accordingly, an Expert Committee to Revise and Strengthen the Monetary Policy Framework 
?                                                                                   ----------

+ I.5 Accordingly, an Expert Committee to Revise and Strengthen the Monetary Policy 
- was appointed on September 12, 2013. The main objective of the Committee is to recommend 
?                                                                                ----------

+ Framework was appointed on September 12, 2013. The main objective of the Committee is to 
? ++++++++++

- what needs to be done to revise and strengthen the current monetary policy framework with a 
?                                                                            -----------------

+ recommend what needs to be done to revise and strengthen the current monetary policy 
? ++++++++++

- view to, inter alia, making it transparent and predictable. 
+ framework with a view to, inter alia, making it transparent and predictable. 
? +++++++++++++++++

  
- I.6 The Committee comprised of: 
+ I.6 The Committee comprised of: 
? +

  
  Chairman: 
  
- 1.  Dr. Urjit R. Patel, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India 
? -

+ 1.  Dr. Urjit R. Patel, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India 
  
  Members: 
  
  2.  Dr. P.J. Nayak 
  3.  Professor Chetan Ghate, Associate Professor, Economics and Planning Unit, Indian 
  
  Statistical Institute, New Delhi 
  
  4.  Professor Peter J. Montiel, Professor of Economics, Williams College, USA 
  5.  Dr. Sajjid Z. Chinoy, Chief Economist and Executive Director, J.P. Morgan 
  6.  Dr. Rupa Nitsure, Chief Economist, Bank of Baroda 
  7.  Dr. Gangadhar Darbha, Executive Director, Nomura Securities 
  8.  Shri Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India 
  
  Member Secretary: 
  
  9.  Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra, Principal Adviser, Monetary Policy Department, Reserve 
  
  Bank of India 
  
  The Secretariat of the Committee comprised Dr. Mridul Saggar, Director, Department of 
  Economic and Policy Research, Shri Sitikantha Pattanaik, Director, Monetary Policy 
  Department, Dr. Praggya Das, Director, Monetary Policy Department and Dr. Abhiman Das, 
  Director, Department of Statistics and Information Management. 
  
  I.7 The terms of reference of the Committee were: 
  
  1.  To review the objectives and conduct of monetary policy in a globalised and highly inter-
  
  connected environment. 
  
  2.  To recommend an appropriate nominal anchor for the conduct of monetary policy. 
  3.  To review the organisational structure, operating framework and instruments of monetary 
  
  policy, particularly the multiple indicator approach and the liquidity management 
  framework, with a view to ensuring compatibility with macroeconomic and financial 
  stability, as well as market development. 
  
  4.  To identify regulatory, fiscal and other impediments to monetary policy transmission, and 
  
  recommend measures and institutional pre-conditions to improve transmission across 
  financial market segments and to the broader economy. 
  
  5.  To carefully consider the recommendations of previous Committees/Groups in respect of 
  
  all of the above. 
  
  The Committee commenced its work from September 26, 2013. The Memorandum appointing 
  the Committee is at Annex A. 
  
- I.8 The Committee gained immensely from deliberations with experts/economists/analysts 
+ I.8 The Committee gained immensely from deliberations with experts/economists/analysts 
? +

  (Annex B). Helpful comments and suggestions were received from Professor Anil Kashyap, 
  University of Chicago and Dr. Sujit Kapadia, Bank of England, which are greatly appreciated. 
  The Committee also benefited from discussions with various officials in the Reserve Bank of 
  India (RBI) including Shri Chandan Sinha, Principal Chief General Manager, Department of 
- 
- Banking Operations and Development; Shri G. Mahalingam, Principal Chief General Manager, 
? -

+ Banking Operations and Development; Shri G. Mahalingam, Principal Chief General Manager, 
  Financial Markets Department; Dr. B. K. Bhoi, Adviser, Monetary Policy Department; Shri 
  Jeevan Kumar Khundrakpam, Director, Monetary Policy Department; Shri A.K. Mitra, Director, 
  Monetary Policy Department and Shri J. B. Singh, Assistant Adviser, Monetary Policy 
  Department. 
  
  I.9 The Committee wishes to place on record appreciation for the team of resource persons who 
  supported the Committees work. Drawn from the Monetary Policy Department, the Department 
  of Economic and Policy Research and the Department of Statistics and Information 
  Management, the contributions of resource persons, i.e., Dr. Saibal Ghosh, Shri Sanjib Bordoloi, 
  Dr. Saurabh Ghosh, Dr. Snehal Herwadkar, Shri S. M. Lokare, Shri Asish Thomas George, Shri 
  Rajesh Kavediya, Shri G. V. Nadhanael, Smt. Abhilasha and Shri Joice John are gratefully 
  acknowledged. The Committee is appreciative of the administrative support from Smt. Indrani 
  Banerjee, Shri P. B. Kulkarni and Shri M. Z. Rahman of the Monetary Policy Department and 
  technical support from the Department of Information Technology. 
  
  I.10 The Committee had six formal meetings and a number of informal meetings. 
  
  I.11 The Report is organised in six chapters: Chapter II revisits the choice of nominal anchor for 
  Indias monetary policy. Chapter III evaluates the effectiveness and transparency of 
  organisational structure, operating framework and instruments of monetary policy. Chapter IV 
  addresses various impediments to transmission of monetary policy. Chapter V discusses the 
  conduct of monetary policy in a globalised environment and Chapter VI provides a summary of 
  the Committees recommendations. 
  
  1. Introduction 
  
  II.1. In recent years, inflation in India has been amongst the highest within the G-20. Household 
  inflation expectations have risen sharply and have remained at elevated levels, unhinged from the 
  low inflation experience of 2000-07 as also from the global inflation record (Table II.1). 
  Professional forecasters surveys show that the long-term inflation expectations have risen by 
  about 150 basis points during this period (Charts II.1 and II.2). 
  
  II.2. The consequences can be far reaching. First, with high and persistent inflation, real interest 
  rates have remained negative for savers during most of the post-global crisis period leading to a 
  decline in domestic financial saving. Second, since Indias inflation has persisted at a level 
  higher than that of trading partners, external competitiveness is getting eroded. If the nominal 
  exchange rate adjusts to offset the inflation differential it can set off a depreciationinflation 
  spiral, thereby undermining macroeconomic stability1. Third, as the recent experience 
  demonstrated, the large demand for gold as a hedge against inflation exacerbated the decline in 
  financial savings and contributed to a widening of the current account deficit (CAD), rendering 
+ 
- the economy vulnerable to external shocks. Fourth, the consequent weakening of the exchange 
+ the economy vulnerable to external shocks. Fourth, the consequent weakening of the exchange 
? +

  rate has imposed balance sheet risks on borrowers in foreign currency with the potential for 
  financial instability. Fifth, persistently high inflation adversely impacts the economys allocative 
  efficiency and impedes growth2. Sixth, high and persistent inflation contributes to a worsening of 
- 
- income distribution as the poor use disproportionately higher cash-in-hand as part of their 
? -

+ income distribution as the poor use disproportionately higher cash-in-hand as part of their 
  savings. 
  
   
  
   
  
  Table II.1: Cross-Country Inflation Comparison 
  
    
  
  I. Global Inflation (CPI) 
  World 
  EMEs 
  BRICS (excluding India) 
  Brazil 
  Russia 
  China 
  South Africa 
  II. Inflation in India 
  Consumer Price Index  Industrial Workers 
  Wholesale Price Index 
  Wholesale Price Index -Food 
  Wholesale Price Index Non Food Manufactured 
  Products 
  Note: Indian inflation pertains to financial year (April-March).  
  Source: World Economic Outlook, IMF; RBI (for India). 
  
    
  
    
  
    
  
    
  
    
  
    
  
    
- 
-   
- 
-   
  3.9 
  6.7 
    
  7.3 
  
  (Per cent y-o-y) 
  2000-07  2008  2009 2010 2011 2012 2008-12 
    
  4.2 
  6.7 
    
  5.5 
  9.2 
  3.3 
  6.7 
    
  10.1 
  7.5 
  10.2 
  
    
- 6.0  2.5  3.6  4.8  4.0 
+   
+   
+ 7.0  2.5 
+ 3  4.8  4.0 
  9.2  5.3  5.9  7.1  6.1 
    
  5.7  4.9  5.0  6.6  5.4 
  14.2  14.1  11.7  6.9  8.4  5.1 
+ 1.7 
  5.9  -0.7  3.3  5.4  2.7 
- 1.7 
  5.3  11.5  7.1  4.3  5.0  5.7 
    
- 9.1  12.4  10.4  8.4 10.4 
?                       -

+ 9.1  12.4  10.4  8.4  1.4 
?                      +

- 8.1  3.8  9.6  8.9  7.4 
+ 7.4 
  8.9  14.6  11.1  7.2  9.3 
  
    
+ 
+   
+ 
+   
+ 
+   
  4.5 
- 5.2 
+ 5.2  8.1%  3.8  9.6 
  3.8 
  
    
  
+  
-   
- 
-   
- 
-   
  
  4.3 
  
  5.7  0.2  6.1  7.3  4.9 
  
  4.8 
  
   
  
   
  
  II.3. Drawing from the lessons of the global financial crisis, there is a consensus gathering 
  internationally that monetary policy should move away from its narrow focus on inflation 
  towards a multiple target-multiple instrument approach without swerving from a commitment to 
  price stability over the medium term. This emerging consensus, however, is reflected primarily 
  in the form of institutionalising greater flexibility in the prevailing monetary policy frameworks 
  rather than an explicit regime overhaul. The Committee recognises the evolving global thinking 
  on the subject. Yet, given the initial conditions facing India at the current juncture, bringing 
  down inflation must be accorded primacy. Anchored inflation expectations will then provide the 
  latitude to address other objectives without compromising on price stability. 
  
  2. Choice of Nominal Anchor 
  
  II.4. A transparent and predictable policy framework is, almost by definition, rule-based. Central 
  to a credible framework is a nominal anchor. Whether fixed or moving, it ties down the final 
+ 
- goal of monetary policy and/or its path in the medium-to long-term, and the expectations of 
+ goal of monetary policy and/or its path in the medium-to long-term, and the expectations of 
? +

  economic agents adjust accordingly. By acting as a constraint on policy discretion, a nominal 
  anchor disincentivises time inconsistency3, including due to pressures from interest groups. 
  
- II.5. Broadly, three types of nominal anchors have been recorded, at least in recent history 
? -

+ II.5. Broadly, three types of nominal anchors have been recorded, at least in recent history 
  (Appendix Table II.1). The exchange rate, arguably the oldest one and an example of a fixed 
  anchor in its original form, faces diminishing practitioner appeal today as it entails a loss of 
  independence of monetary policy in the pursuit of national objectives, and exposes the economy 
  to external shocks, particularly those emanating from the anchor economy. Furthermore, as 
  currency crises have repeatedly shown, an exchange rate anchor makes the monetary policy 
  framework vulnerable to speculative attacks and consequent financial instability. 
  
  II.6 Monetary aggregates have also served as nominal anchors, but they have been undermined 
  by instability and loss of predictability of the demand for money, discrediting accountability and 
  communication when targets are missed. 
  
  II.7. Since the late 1980s, several countries have adopted inflation as a nominal anchor for 
  monetary policy, drawing upon the strong theoretical and empirical support for low and stable 
  inflation as a necessary precondition for sustainable high growth. 
  
  II.8. The explicit domestic orientation of inflation is seen as a clear advantage over other 
  candidates for the nominal anchor. It tasks monetary policy to achieve price stability as an 
  unambiguous and sustainable goal upon which the private sector can anchor its expectations 
  about future inflation. The other positives associated with inflation as an anchor are that it is 
  simple, easily communicated and hence, well understood by the public at large. By promoting 
  low and stable inflation expectations, it contributes to producing a desirable macroeconomic 
  outcome. The varied country experience with inflation targeting (IT) suggests that it has yielded 
  significant benefits in terms of reduced inflation volatility (Svensson, 1997), reduced impact of 
  shocks (Mishkin, 2004) and anchoring of inflation expectations (Kohn 2007, Swanson, 2006, 
  Levin et al., 2004)4. Accordingly, IT frameworks have gained widening acceptance among 
  advanced and emerging economies alike (Appendix Tables II.2A and II.3). This has catalysed 
  the deepening of the institutional architecture around them. 
  
  II.9. IT has disadvantages in that (a) some part of inflation, such as from food and fuel, is not 
  easily controlled by monetary policy; (b) it is inherently a medium-term framework because of 
  the long and variable lags in monetary policy transmission. The lack of immediate 
  demonstrability of outcomes can result in ambiguous perceptions of the policy stance. Yet 
  another concern has been the instability imparted to output and employment due to the 
  overarching emphasis on achieving the inflation target, and the observed increase in output 
  losses associated with disinflation. 
  
  II.10. Starting with Chile in 1991, the number of EMEs (23) adopting inflation targeting as a 
  monetary policy framework has outstripped that of AEs (9). Most EMEs used inflation targeting 
  initially as a price stabilising device, with a sequence of annually declining inflation targets 
  measured by headline consumer price index (CPI) which is perceived as well understood by the 
  public and quickly available. These EMEs tended to move away from a one-year ahead inflation 
+ 
- target to either multi-year targets or a medium-term target. Several countries in this category 
+ target to either multi-year targets or a medium-term target. Several countries in this category 
? +

  refer to their monetary policy framework as inflation targeting light (ITL)5. There are some 38 
  countries that have not committed to any specific target; among EMEs, important examples in 
  this category are Russia (to complete transition to an IT regime by 2015) and India. 
  
- II.11. Finally, some monetary policy frameworks do not operate under an explicit nominal 
? -

+ II.11. Finally, some monetary policy frameworks do not operate under an explicit nominal 
  anchor, but such an anchor is implicit and the track record has been creditable6 (e.g., the US), 
  with forward-looking behaviour triggering pre-emptive strikes against target warnings 
  (Appendix Table II.2B). The main criticisms are the uncertainty in financial markets on policy 
  actions and herding of expectations; strong dependence on individual skills and charisma of the 
  monetary policy wielder; and susceptibility to outside pressures. 
  
  II.12. In spite of strong theoretical positions that monetary policy can only hope to affect 
  nominal variables, and that in the long run, there is no tradeoff between inflation and 
  employment, policy makers in some parts of the world have shown interest in bypassing nominal 
  anchors and choosing targets from among real variables that have a direct bearing on growth and 
  consumption. Real exchange rate targeting has been the most popular, but the experience has 
  been that while monetary policy may be able to temporarily influence the real exchange rate, this 
  can come at the cost of a combination of higher inflation and higher real interest rates. 
  Additionally, this runs the risk of losing the nominal anchor completely  in the case of the real 
  exchange rate target for instance, the rate of nominal appreciation/ depreciation becomes 
  undetermined. The real interest rate has served as an anchor as well7. Here too, the experience 
  has shown that inflation can easily come unhinged since there is nothing to tie it down8. 
  
  3. The Indian Experience 
  
  II.13. Indias monetary policy framework has undergone several transformations, reflecting 
  underlying macroeconomic and financial conditions as also the dominant socio-politico-
  economic paradigm. Drawing from the colonial past, the initial years following independence 
  were characterised by an exchange rate anchor set by the proportional reserve system prescribed 
  by the RBI Act where under at least 40 per cent of the total note issue was to be backed by gold 
  bullion and sterling. The proportional reserve system gave way to the minimum reserve system 
  in 1957 (only `2 billion worth of foreign securities and bullion needed to be maintained as a 
  backing for currency issue, of which `1.15 billion had to be in gold) and the use of credit 
  aggregates as the nominal anchor for monetary policy. Changes in the Bank Rate and the cash 
  reserve ratio (CRR) were the main instruments of monetary policy supporting its explicit credit 
  allocation role embodied in selective credit control, credit authorisation and social control 
  measures to enhance the flow of credit to priority sectors. Setting the tone of monetary policy, 
  the First Five Year Plan envisaged ...judicious credit creation somewhat in anticipation of the 
  increase in production and availability of genuine savings. 
  
  II.14. During 1971-1985, the monetisation of the fiscal deficit exerted a dominant influence on 
  the conduct of monetary policy. The pre-emption of resources by the public sector and the 
  resultant inflationary consequences of high public expenditure necessitated frequent recourse to 
  the CRR to neutralise the secondary effects of the expansion. Financial repression in the form of 
  interest rate prescriptions, statutory pre-emptions and directed credit partly crowded out the 
+ 
- private sector from the credit market. Against this backdrop, the Committee to Review the 
+ private sector from the credit market. Against this backdrop, the Committee to Review the 
? +

  Working of the Monetary System (Chairman: Dr. Sukhamoy Chakravarty) recommended in 
  1985 a new monetary policy framework based on monetary targeting with feedback, drawing on 
  empirical evidence of a stable demand function for money. Thus, broad money became the 
  intermediate target while reserve money was one of the main operating instruments for achieving 
- 
- control on broad money growth. The Committee had also emphasized that short-term interest 
? -

+ control on broad money growth. The Committee had also emphasized that short-term interest 
  rates could reinforce the antiinflationary impact of monetary targeting if they are also used as a 
  monetary management tool in fighting inflation. 
  
  II.15. Analysis of the money growth outcomes during the monetary targeting regime indicates 
  that targets were rarely met9. The biggest impediment to monetary targeting was lack of control 
  over RBIs credit to the central government, which accounted for the bulk of reserve money 
  creation10. Even with the CRR and the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) raised to close to their 
  statutory ceilings, money supply growth remained high and fuelled inflation persistence at 
  elevated levels. With the reforms introduced in 1991, capital flows became another factor that 
  rendered control over monetary aggregates difficult. As the pace of trade and financial 
  liberalisation gained momentum in the 1990s, the efficacy of broad money as an intermediate 
  target was re-assessed. Financial innovations and external shocks emanating from swings in 
  capital flows, volatility in the exchange rate and global business cycles imparted instability to the 
  demand for money. There was also increasing evidence of changes in the underlying 
  transmission mechanism of monetary policy with interest rate and the exchange rate gaining 
  importance vis--vis quantity variables. 
  
  II.16. The structural reforms and financial liberalisation in the 1990s also led to a shift in the 
  financing pattern for the government and commercial sectors, with interest rates and the 
  exchange rate, increasingly market-determined. The RBI was able to move away from direct 
  instruments to indirect market-based instruments. The CRR and SLR were brought down to 9.5 
  per cent and 25 per cent of NDTL of banks, respectively, by 1997. The RBI adopted a multiple 
  indicator approach in April 1998 with a greater emphasis on rate channels for monetary policy 
  formulation relative to quantity instruments11. Under this approach, which is currently in use, a 
  number of quantity variables such as money, credit, output, trade, capital flows and fiscal 
  position as well as rate variables such as rates of return in different markets, inflation rate and 
  exchange rate are analyzed for drawing monetary policy perspectives. The multiple indicator 
  approach is informed by forward looking indicators since the early 2000s drawn from the RBIs 
  surveys of industrial outlook, credit conditions, capacity utilization, professional forecasters, 
  inflation expectations and consumer confidence. The RBI continues to give indicative 
  projections of key monetary aggregates. 
  
  II.17. The multiple indicator approach seemed to work fairly well from 1998-99 to 2008-09, as 
  reflected in an average real gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of 7.1 per cent associated 
  with average inflation of about 5.5 per cent in terms of both the wholesale price index (WPI) and 
  the CPI. In recent years, however, there has been mounting public censure of the efficacy and 
  even the credibility of this framework as persistently high inflation and weakening growth have 
  come to co-exist. Using a large panel of indicators has been criticised as not providing a clearly 
  defined nominal anchor for monetary policy12. It also leaves policy analysts unclear about what 
  the RBI looks at while taking policy decisions. 
  
- II.18. WPI and Consumer Price Index-Industrial Workers (CPI-IW) inflation declined from 8.0 
+ II.18. WPI and Consumer Price Index-Industrial Workers (CPI-IW) inflation declined from 8.0 
? +

  per cent and 8.8 per cent, respectively, in the monetary targeting regime (1985-86 to 1997-98), to 
  5.4 per cent and 5.6 per cent, respectively, during the first decade of the multiple indicator 
  regime (1998-99 to 2008-09). Thereafter, it rose to 7.2 per cent and 10.5 per cent, respectively, 
- 
- between April 2009 and November 2013. Since 2008, retail inflation has trended up and has 
? -

+ between April 2009 and November 2013. Since 2008, retail inflation has trended up and has 
  persisted at double digit levels over the last six years (Charts II.3 and II.4). In addition to supply 
  side bottlenecks, there have been sharp increases in the minimum support prices (MSPs) since 
  2007-08 (Tables II.2 and II.3). 
  
  3.2. Rationale for Flexible Inflation Targeting in India 
  
  II.23. Major central banks, in both advanced and emerging economies, have adopted flexible 
  inflation targeting (FIT) under which the inflation target is aimed to be achieved on average over 
  the business cycle, while accommodating growth concerns in the short run (Ito, 2013).14 While 
  FIT recognises the existence of the growth-inflation trade-off in the short run, it is designed 
  around the critical importance of price stability for sustainable growth in the medium run. The 
  flexibility under FIT, however, is not relevant for conditions where the inflation target is not 
  achieved even over a full business cycle  whether at any point of time or on an average i.e., high 
  inflation expectations exhibit far greater stickiness than inflation  despite sustained slowdown in 
  growth; and persistently high inflation in itself becomes a risk to growth (please see footnote no. 
  2), which limits the space for accommodating growth concerns even in the short run. India, 
  arguably, faces similar conditions in recent years and visible signs of stagflation  i.e., high 
  inflation co-existing with sluggish growth  warrants a refocusing on the critical importance of 
  price stability for improving overall macroeconomic stability in the near term, and for securing 
  growth prospects in the medium run. As set out in Paragraph II.3, India is faced with the unique 
  challenge of experiencing one of the highest inflation rates among G-20 countries, with the level 
  of inflation expectations having doubled over the last four years. As enunciated earlier, elevated 
  inflation is creating macroeconomic vulnerabilities. In the light of these unique circumstances, 
  the foremost and dominant objective of monetary policy must be to anchor inflation 
  expectations. A monetary policy framework with inflation as the nominal anchor is also 
  consistent with flexibility in exchange rate management15. 
  
  II.24. Stabilising and anchoring inflation expectations  whether they are rational or adaptive  is 
  critical for ensuring price stability on an enduring basis, so that monetary policy re-establishes 
  credibility visibly and transparently, that deviations from desirable levels of inflation on a 
  persistent basis will not be tolerated. In doing so, monetary policy provides a common set of 
  expectations to all economic agents which, in turn, influences their behaviour and thereby 
  aggregate demand. These dynamics can be captured within the framework of the New Keynesian 
  macroeconomic model that is widely employed by modern central banks (Box II.1). 
  
  Recommendations 
  
  II.25. Drawing from the review of cross-country experience, the appraisal of Indias monetary 
  policy against the test of outcomes and the recommendations made by previous committees, the 
  Committee recommends that inflation should be the nominal anchor for the monetary policy 
  framework. This nominal anchor should be set by the RBI as its predominant objective of 
+ 
- monetary policy in its policy statements. The nominal anchor should be communicated without 
+ monetary policy in its policy statements. The nominal anchor should be communicated without 
? +

  ambiguity, so as to ensure a monetary policy regime shift away from the current approach to one 
  that is centered around the nominal anchor. Subject to the establishment and achievement of the 
- 
- nominal anchor, monetary policy conduct should be consistent with a sustainable growth 
? -

+ nominal anchor, monetary policy conduct should be consistent with a sustainable growth 
  trajectory and financial stability. 
  
  Box II.1: A Theoretical Framework as a Guide for Monetary Policy 
  
  The New Keynesian (NK) research programme is one of the most influential and prolific areas of 
  research in monetary policy analysis. The framework provides the foundations of the NK DSGE 
  (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) model which is the workhorse model for the analysis of 
  monetary policy at major central banks. DSGE models are based on optimising behaviour of 
  households and firms, rational expectations, and market clearing, i.e., it adopts many of the tools 
  associated with research on real business cycles. However, firms are modeled as monopolistic 
  competitors, and nominal rigidities a key element of the model bring the main source of 
  monetary policy non-neutrality (Gali, 2008a, 2008b; Walsh, 2010; Sbordone et al., 2010). 
  
  The simple NK model comprises three equations. The first equation is called the New Keynesian 
  Philips Curve (NKPC). This is the supply block of the model. This can be derived from the 
  aggregation of price-setting decisions by firms, combined with an equation describing the 
  relationship between marginal cost and the level of activity (see Gali 2008a, 2008b). It is given 
  by: 
  
  where = 0 denotes a central bank that is a strict inflation targeter, and  > 0 denotes a central 
  bank that is a flexible inflation targeter (i.e., also concerned about the stability of the economy). 
  
  Flexible inflation targeting refers to an optimal monetary policy that minimizes the central 
  banks loss function (subject to equation (1)) by attaching a penalty to output gap fluctuations. It 
  can be shown that there are potential welfare gains to be made if the central bank conveys 
  credibly the extent of its anti-inflationary stance (Svensson, 1997). Further, in the context of the 
  simple NK model in equations (1), (2) and (3), the welfare comparisons will vary depending on 
  the weight given to output stabilization. The general result is that the smallest welfare losses are 
  obtained when monetary policy responds to changes in inflation only. 
  
  As Gali (2008b) points out, there are two direct costs of inflation in this framework which justify 
  why central banks should pursue a policy aimed at price stability. In the absence of cost-push 
  shocks, inflation becomes an indicator of an inefficient level of economic activity, because of the 
  deviation of output from its natural level due to the presence of nominal rigidities. Inflation also 
  generates a more inefficient allocation of resources across firms and sectors, because not all 
  firms can adjust their prices, which makes relative prices vary in accordance with firm or sectoral 
  level shocks. This leads to sub-optimal goods being consumed and produced. Both 
  considerations, and other practical considerations (such as the risk of hitting the zero lower 
  bound on the nominal interest rate), suggest that a desirable policy is the attainment of a positive 
  target for inflation over a medium-term horizon. Also, because inflation and the output gap are 
  forward-looking variables, the analysis of monetary policy in the context of models with 
+ 
- forward-looking variables points to the importance of a credible commitment to improve the 
+ forward-looking variables points to the importance of a credible commitment to improve the 
? +

  central banks trade-offs. 
  
- The NK framework can be used to evaluate the desirability of alternative monetary policy rules. 
? -

+ The NK framework can be used to evaluate the desirability of alternative monetary policy rules. 
  It can also be used to determine the optimal monetary policy rule using welfarebased criterion. 
  Because of its flexibility, it is able to incorporate a wide variety of country-specific 
  characteristics of emerging market economies (commodity price shocks, formal-informal sector 
  linkages), as well as other extensions (open economy features, credit frictions, etc.) for monetary 
  policy analysis. 
  
  References: 
  
  1. Gali, Jordi (2008a) Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to 
  the New Keynesian Framework, Princeton University Press, New Jersey. 
  
  2. Gali, Jordi (2008b) The New Keynesian Approach to Monetary Policy Analysis: Lessons and 
  New Directions, Economics Working Papers 1075, Department of Economics and Business, 
  Universitat Pompeu Fabra, February 
  
  3. Ghate, Chetan, Pandey, Radhika and Ila Patnaik (2013) Has India Emerged? Business Cycle 
  Stylized Facts from a Transitioning Economy Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, Vol. 
  24(C), pp 157-172 
  
  4. Walsh, Carl E. (2010) Monetary Theory and Policy, Third Edition. MIT Press Books, The 
  MIT Press. 
  
  5. Sbordone, Argia M., Tambalotti, Andrea, Rao, Krishna and Kieran Walsh (2010) Policy 
  Analysis Using DSGE Models: An Introduction Economic Policy Review, Vol. 16, No. 2, 
  October, pp 23-43. 
  
  6. Woodford, Michael (2003) Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, 
  Princeton University Press, New Jersey. 
  
  7. Svensson, Lars E. O. (1997) Optimal Inflation Targets, Conservative Central Banks, and 
  Linear Inflation Contracts, American Economic Review, Vol. 87(1), pp 98-114. 
  
  II.26. This recommendation is intended to better ground inflation expectations by making clear 
  that inflation is the RBIs primary objective and that it expects to be held accountable for its 
  performance in this regard. 
  
  4. The Choice of Inflation Metric in India 
  
  4.1 Range of Options 
  
  II.27. Until recently, the RBI communicated indicative inflation projections in terms of the WPI 
  alone, essentially because it is the only measure of prices at a national level and CPIs have 
+ 
- traditionally addressed prices facing specific sections of society. The three legacy consumer 
+ traditionally addressed prices facing specific sections of society. The three legacy consumer 
? +

  price indices  CPI-IW, Consumer Price Index- Agricultural Labourers (CPIAL) and Consumer 
  Price Index-Rural Labourers (CPIRL)  capture the heterogeneity of the economic structure and 
- 
- the differences in the consumption basket across different population segments. Since October 
? -

+ the differences in the consumption basket across different population segments. Since October 
  2013, the RBI has started providing indicative projections of inflation in terms of the broader 
  CPI-Combined. While WPI weights are primarily based on production and traded values, the 
  CPI-Combined weighting diagram is based on the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO)s 
  2004-05 consumer expenditure survey. The RBI internally conducts inflation analysis on the 
  basis of a number of other indicators besides WPI/CPIs  inflation expectations; yield spreads; 
  input and output prices in business expectations surveys and purchasing managers indices; rural 
  wages and corporate staff costs; house prices and the like. 
  
  II.28. The WPI is an imperfect substitute for a producer price index (PPI). Furthermore, it does 
  not capture price movements in non-commodity producing sectors like services, which constitute 
  close to two-thirds of economic activity in India. It also does not generally reflect price 
  movements in all wholesale markets as the price quotes of some of the important commodities 
  like milk, LPG and the like are basically taken from retail markets. Movements in WPI often 
  reflect large external shocks. Moreover, it is often subject to large revisions; for instance, 
  between January 2010 and October 2013, WPI inflation was revised 43 times out of which 36 
  times were in the upward direction. These revisions are made two months after the first 
  announcement, generating large uncertainty in the assessment of inflation conditions. 
  Conducting monetary policy based on provisional numbers generally entails the risk of under-
  estimating inflationary pressures, especially when inflation is rising. 
  
  II.29. The true inflation that consumers face is in the retail market. Although price indices that 
  relate to consumer expenditures are at best imperfect, they are still close indicators of the cost of 
  living. Almost all central banks in AEs and EMEs use CPI as their primary price indicator. Other 
  price indicators like the national income price deflator are used as a secondary indicator16. The 
  choice of CPI establishes trust viz., economic agents note that the monetary policy maker is 
  targeting an index that is relevant for households and businesses17. The widespread use of the 
  CPI as the major price indicator reflects its advantages  it is familiar to large segments of the 
  population and often used in both public and private sectors as a reference in the provision of 
  government benefits or in wage contracts and negotiations. Importantly in India, unlike the WPI, 
  the CPI is not subject to large revisions, which enhances its utility to the public and its usefulness 
  for monetary policy purposes18. There is no revision in CPI-IW and in case of the CPI-
  Combined, revisions have so far been marginal. 
  
  II.30. It is observed that the CPI-Combined has a strong and statistically significant correlation 
  with the CPI-IW, allowing the superimposition of the weighting pattern of the former on the 
  price trends of the latter so as to generate a sufficiently long time series for empirical assessment. 
  The lag in the data release of the CPI-Combined is only 12 days as against one month for CPI-
  IW. The CPI-Combined and the CPI-IW also show similar inflation momentum. Also, the CPI-
  Combined is empirically found to be robust in comparison with CPI-IW as far as price reporting 
  is concerned. Accordingly, the argument that the CPI-Combined does not have adequate history 
  to support data analysis is not by itself a limiting consideration. 
  
- II.31. In India, food has 48 per cent weight in the CPI-Combined. If food and fuel and light 
+ II.31. In India, food has 48 per cent weight in the CPI-Combined. If food and fuel and light 
? +

  are excluded in order to arrive at a core inflation measure, 57.1 per cent of the consumption 
  basket will be discarded. Also, two major energy components, viz., petrol and diesel, are part of 
- 
- transport and communication, which cannot be further segregated (as item level disaggregated 
? -

+ transport and communication, which cannot be further segregated (as item level disaggregated 
  price index is not available for the CPI-Combined). This also limits the estimation of CPI core 
  inflation based on statistical techniques other than exclusion. Furthermore, high inflation in food 
  and energy items is generally reflected in elevated inflation expectations. With a lag, this gets 
  manifested in the inflation of other items, particularly services. Shocks to food inflation and fuel 
  inflation also have a much larger and more persistent impact on inflation expectations than 
  shocks to non-food non-fuel inflation. As such, any attempt to anchor inflation expectations 
  cannot ignore shocks to food and fuel. Furthermore, it is the headline CPI that households use to 
  deflate nominal returns and therefore headline CPI informs their portfolio choice of financial 
  assets vis-a-vis other categories (like gold and real estate). Therefore, in spite of the argument 
  made that a substantial part of CPI inflation may not be in the ambit of monetary policy to 
  control, the exclusion of food and energy may not yield true measure of inflation for 
  conducting monetary policy. In these conditions, the CPI-Combined based headline inflation 
  measure appears to be the most feasible and appropriate measure of inflation  as the closest 
  proxy of a true cost of living index  for the conduct of monetary policy. Going forward, 
  improvements in the index will be helpful to make the CPI-Combined a more robust and 
  comprehensive measure of inflation conditions (Box II.2). 
  
  Box II.2: CPI-Combined as a Representative Measure of Inflation 
  
  The introduction of new CPIs in 2011, i.e., all India CPICombined, CPI-Rural and CPI-Urban 
  provides for the first time a nationwide retail price index in India that captures the inflation faced 
  by households, i.e., cost of living inflation. The new CPIs have a comprehensive coverage across 
  regions as well as commodity groups including services. With a base year of 2010, the new CPIs 
  have a weighting pattern that reflects more recent consumption patterns as compared with the 
  other CPIs, as it is based on NSSOs 61st Round of Consumer Expenditure Survey data (2004-
  05). The CPI consumption basket will become up to date with its forthcoming revision based on 
  weights from the NSS 68th round Consumer Expenditure Survey (2011-12). As per the latest 
  NSSO survey, the weight of food in the consumption basket has gone down (from 55.0 per cent 
  and 42.5 per cent respectively in the 2004-05 Round to 48.6 per cent and 38.5 per cent in the 
  2010-11 Round for rural and urban areas, as per the uniform reference period (URP) of last 30 
  days). 
  
  The prices data collected from across India on a monthly basis by NSSO, Department of Posts as 
  well as through web portals maintained by the National Informatics Centre, has contributed to 
  improving the quality of data. At times, other measures of CPI have yielded similar inflation as 
  the new CPIs; however, due to large differences in coverage and the weighting diagram (Table 
  1), comparison of new CPI and old CPIs (i.e. CPI-IW, CPI-AL and CPI-RL) at item level, is not 
  directly feasible. 
  
  While inflation measured by CPI-Combined is the most representative among available measures 
  of inflation for households and therefore monetary policy, disaggregated information on weights 
  and prices at the commodity level is not yet available. Public dissemination of disaggregated 
+ 
- information is important for analysis and as a public good in itself. Availability of data on item 
+ information is important for analysis and as a public good in itself. Availability of data on item 
? +

  level indices will also help in understanding the nature of price flexibility/ stickiness. Moreover, 
  if the disaggregated information is also made available for sub-groups based on Classification of 
- 
- Individual Consumption by Purpose (COICOP), it would facilitate cross-country comparison of 
? -

+ Individual Consumption by Purpose (COICOP), it would facilitate cross-country comparison of 
  price movements. 
  
  Currently, the housing index for CPI-Urban includes different sub-samples for different months 
  and the samples are repeated only once in six months. Information on centres included in each 
  sub-sample would be required to get a clearer idea of region specific movements in house prices 
  and rent. 
  
  CPI- 
  Urban 
  
  CPI- 
  IW 
  
  Table 1: Weight of Different Groups in the CPIs 
  Items 
  
  Food and beverages 
  Pan, tobacco and intoxicants 
  Fuel and light 
  Housing 
  Clothing, bedding and footwear 
  Miscellaneous 
  Note: CPI-Urban and CPI-Rural are the components of the new 
  CPICombined 
  
  CPI- 
  Rural 
  35.80  46.19  56.58 
  2.27 
  2.73 
  6.43  10.42 
  - 
  5.36 
  28.00  23.27  24.91 
  
  22.53  15.27 
  6.57 
  
  3.91 
  
  1.35 
  8.40 
  
  CPI- RL  CPI- 
  
  Combined 
  47.58 
  2.13 
  9.49 
  9.77 
  4.73 
  26.31 
  
  66.77 
  3.7 
  7.9 
  - 
  9.76 
  11.87 
  
  The CPI-Combined is compiled based on aggregation of State-level CPIs using state-based 
  weights to derive the all India Index. Considering the heterogeneous nature of price movements 
  across different regions, the CPI-Combined inflation could be susceptible to localised price 
  pressures and volatility. Having indices based on national level weights at commodity level, to 
  an extent, could mitigate this. More detailed information at the state level should also be made 
  available in the public domain. 
  
  Given that CPI captures end-user prices which include both central and state taxes, there could 
  be price fluctuations imparted by different tax structures across States. Currently, in the absence 
  of a uniform GST, state level variations in tax policies and their contribution to the national 
  inflation would have to be carefully analysed to understand the inflation dynamics. Some 
  information on the tax component of prices at retail level, if compiled separately, could help in 
  disentangling the effects of market driven price movements from the impact of changes in taxes 
  on CPI. 
  
  Currently services are largely captured within the Miscellaneous group. Even within the sub-
  group of miscellaneous, the baskets constitute a mix of goods and services. A separate service 
  price index as a memo item would be desirable for analytical purposes. 
  
  4.2 Rationale for the Choice of CPI 
  
  II.32. In view of the long and variable lags characterising monetary policy, an appropriate 
  inflation indicator has to be forward-looking, tracking inflation expectations. A wide consensus 
+ 
- in the theoretical and empirical literature has settled around the position that inflation is driven 
+ in the theoretical and empirical literature has settled around the position that inflation is driven 
? +

  by the output gap and by inflation expectations (either backward or forward-looking) which 
  influence wage and price setting behavior (as typified in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve 
- 
- (NKPC)). The evidence forming in the post-2008 global financial crisis period suggest that the 
? -

+ (NKPC)). The evidence forming in the post-2008 global financial crisis period suggest that the 
  role of inflation expectations in shaping inflation dynamics has become even more important. 
  Illustratively, the level of slack in advanced economies should have imparted sustained 
  deflationary pressures in this period; instead, inflation has remained in the 2-3 per cent range 
  because inflation expectations were anchored at those levels by advanced economy central banks 
  (IMF, 2013)19. More generally, over the last few decades the role of output gaps vis--vis 
  inflation expectations in influencing inflation dynamics is observed to be secularly falling. 
  
  II.33. A similar dynamic, albeit undesirable, may be currently playing out in India. Even as the 
  Indian economy has experienced negative output gaps in 2013, CPI inflation excluding food and 
  fuel has remained sticky at an elevated level, averaging above 8 per cent, and playing a growing 
  role in determining wage and price behavior in India. The crucial question, therefore, is: what is 
  driving household inflation expectations in India? An examination of the quantitative inflation 
  expectations of households in the RBIs survey shows that inflation expectations tended to 
  follow WPI inflation during 2008-09. Post- 2011, however, they seem to be following CPI 
  inflation. Panel data analysis based on the RBIs urban households inflation expectations survey 
  shows that both three-month ahead and one-year ahead expectations are significantly influenced 
  by food as well as fuel inflation measured from CPI-IW (Annex 2). This indicates the need to 
  target headline CPI and not CPI excluding food and fuel to anchor inflation expectations. 
  Empirical evidence also suggests that: (a) changes in CPI-headline as well as CPI-food and fuel 
  inflation drive changes in inflation expectations, and (b) increases in policy rates respond to 
  rising inflation expectations (details in Chapter-IV). 
  
  II.34. Modeling inflation as a function of its lag and forward-looking inflation expectations along 
  with the output gap in a Bayesian Vector Auto Regression (VAR) framework  to account for the 
  dynamic properties of each variable and the simultaneity properties  shows that shocks to food 
  and fuel inflation within the CPI basket have the largest and most persistent impact on overall 
  inflation expectations. Specifically, a 100 basis points (bps) shock to food inflation immediately 
  affects one-year forward expectations by as much as 50 bps and persists for 8 quarters. The 
  persistence of the food inflation shock on expectations reveals that either households perceive 
  food shocks to be sustained and/or they expect food shocks will inevitably translate into a more 
  generalized inflation with a lag. Shocks to fuel inflation also result in large changes in 
  expectations but are less persistent, impacting one-year-ahead expectations up to four quarters. 
  Interestingly, shocks to inflation excluding food and fuel have a far more muted quantitative 
  impact on expectations and persist for only two-three quarters. Shocks to WPI inflation have no 
  statistically significant impact on inflation expectations, indicating that targeting the WPI would 
  do little to anchor inflation expectations. This analysis is robust to different estimations of output 
  gaps and to the use of both three-month and one-year-ahead inflation expectations (Box II.3). 
  
  II.35. The results are intuitive because households experience food and fuel price changes on a 
  daily basis but other prices change infrequently. The role of inflation expectations cannot be 
  ignored in the price formation process and, in fact, may have assumed greater importance than 
  before. In particular, the elevated and entrenched nature of expectations in India  as measured 
+ 
- by the RBIs households surveys  is likely a key reason why elevated inflation currently co-
+ by the RBIs households surveys  is likely a key reason why elevated inflation currently co-
? +

  exists with negative output gaps. Consequently, the choice of the inflation metric cannot ignore 
  food and fuel shocks and must, in fact, react to them to avoid a more generalized inflation spiral 
- 
- that influences household expectations lastingly. Not a single EME inflation-targeting central 
? -

+ that influences household expectations lastingly. Not a single EME inflation-targeting central 
  bank targets core CPI  other than Thailand  all of them target headline CPI. It is often argued 
  that India is unique, with food and fuel inflation constituting 57.1 per cent of the CPI basket and 
  therefore outside the direct control of the RBI. In this context, however, it needs to be recognized 
  that there are other EMEs that also have a relatively significant fraction of food and fuel in the 
  CPI basket (close to 40 per cent in the case of Indonesia and Brazil) but still choose to target 
  headline CPI20. Accordingly, the Committee is of the view that in the current context, targeting 
  headline CPI would be a critical prerequisite for reducing and then anchoring inflation 
  expectations. 
  
  Recommendation 
  
   
  
  II.36. The Committee recommends that the RBI should adopt the new CPI (combined) as the 
  measure of the nominal anchor for policy communication. The nominal anchor should be defined 
  in terms of headline CPI inflation, which closely reflects the cost of living and influences 
  inflation expectations relative to other available metrics. 
  
  5. Numerical Target and Precision 
  
  II.37. A numerical inflation target reflects, explicitly or implicitly, the meaning of price stability 
  in a country specific context. An explicit interpretation of inflation as an objective of monetary 
  policy is exemplified by the ECB which defines price stability as ...a year-on-year increase in 
  the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2 per cent. An 
  illustration of an implicit inflation goal is that of China: Government announced to hold CPI 
  inflation in 2013 at 3.5 per cent, 0.5 percentage point lower than the target of last year. The 
  cross country experience suggests that the numerical target should be a low but non-zero positive 
  number. 
  
  II.38. What should be the non-zero positive number for India? Estimates using multivariate 
  methods on quarterly data indicate that the level of CPI-Combined inflation (all India back-
  casted using the CPI-IW) above which it is inimically harmful to growth is 6.2 per cent (Annex 
  3). Alternative methods of estimating the output gap (univariate and multivariate) suggest that 
  the output gap was fairly close to zero during the period from Q3 of 2003-04 and Q1 of 2006-07 
  (Annex 4). During the same period, average CPI inflation was at around 4 per cent. Admittedly, 
  these estimates may not hold for a future regime that is centered around a clear nominal anchor 
  (in other words, the past may not be a robust guide to the future  a form of Lucas critique at 
  play). Notwithstanding the limitations, these estimates provide, as a possible starting point, 
  empirical support to a range of 4 to 6 per cent for the inflation target. 
  
  II.39. The choice of the exact numerical range or target for a country is also informed by 
  inflation in comparator EMEs and trading partners, consistent with its broader integration with 
+ 
- the global economy. Country practices suggest that the target should be either less than or equal 
+ the global economy. Country practices suggest that the target should be either less than or equal 
? +

  to the level of inflation that may be consistent with minimum attainable noninflationary rate of 
  unemployment or maximum non-inflationary rate of growth21. In the literature, there is a 
- 
- convergence of views that an inflation rate of 1 to 3 per cent corresponds to price stability in AEs 
? -

+ convergence of views that an inflation rate of 1 to 3 per cent corresponds to price stability in AEs 
  (since the Balassa-Samuelson effect would suggest higher inflation in emerging markets), while 
  in transition economies inflation in the range of 4 to 5 per cent would correspond to price 
  stability22 (Appendix Table II.4A and B). Thus, the 1 to 3 per cent AE inflation range sets a 
  lower bound, while an inflation rate for India at around 6 per cent23 can be regarded as an upper 
  bound. The key advantage of a range/band is that it allows monetary policy to do best what it can 
  do, i.e., it remains sensitive to short run trade-offs between inflation and growth, but pursues the 
  inflation target on average over the course of a business cycle. Data limitations (ranging from 
  large revisions to low quality of final revised data), projection errors, and short run developments 
  having a large impact on the near-term inflation path  such as failure of agricultural crops, high 
  commodity prices, sharp depreciation in the exchange rate, higher taxes  also warrant flexibility 
  through adoption of ranges/ bands. A band also provides lead information on maximum tolerance 
  levels of monetary policy to accommodate unanticipated shocks, which enhances transparency 
  and predictability. 
  
  5.1. Time Horizon for Attaining Price Stability 
  
  II.40. Speed of disinflation is important for arriving at the appropriate time horizon over which 
  the inflation target may have to be attained, but particularly important for a country aiming at 
  adoption of flexible inflation targeting from a very high and persistent level of CPI inflation. 
  Speed also has to take into account the fact that prolonged high inflation itself imposes costs  in 
  the recent experience in India, these costs have entailed appreciating real effective exchange rate 
  (REER), high CAD, financial disintermediation (into gold), and resultant decline in financial 
  saving and investment that may have contributed to low growth. 
  
  II.41. It is difficult to identify the optimal speed of disinflation. The time horizon should ideally 
  reflect the trade off long and variable lags (which may justify two to three years) versus 
  credibility of the target (which may demand a shorter time horizon of about one year, since large 
  deviations in the short run, despite the best communication, may not help in anchoring inflation 
  expectations)24 (Appendix Table II.5). While the Committee recognises that setting a relatively 
  short time horizon can pose controllability problems (i.e., ability of a central bank to achieve the 
  targets without large costs) and lead to loss of credibility if the target is missed, a time horizon of 
  two years for achieving the inflation target is necessitated by the initial conditions in India and 
  the serious macroeconomic consequences that they have entailed. A two-year time horizon 
  should enable the performance of monetary policy to be easily verified by the public, enhancing 
  credibility. Recognising, however, that large output variations in a short time horizon should 
  generally be avoided by monetary policy, it is pragmatic, on balance, to set multi-year targets 
  that provide a lower medium-term target along with somewhat higher targets for the intermediate 
  years (Box II.4). 
  
  Recommendations 
  
- II.42. The Committee recommends that the nominal anchor or target should be set at 4 per cent 
+ II.42. The Committee recommends that the nominal anchor or target should be set at 4 per cent 
? +

  with a band of +/- 2 per cent around it (a) in view of the vulnerability of the Indian economy to 
  supply/ external shocks and the relatively large weight of food in the CPI; and (b) the need to 
  avoid a deflation bias in the conduct of monetary policy. This target should be set in the frame of 
- 
- a two-year horizon that is consistent with the need to balance the output costs of disinflation 
? -

+ a two-year horizon that is consistent with the need to balance the output costs of disinflation 
  against the speed of entrenchment of credibility in policy commitment. 
  
  II.43. In view of the elevated level of current CPI inflation and hardened inflation expectations, 
  supply constraints and weak output performance, the transition path to the target zone should be 
  graduated to bringing down inflation from the current level of 10 per cent to 8 per cent over a 
  period not exceeding the next 12 months and 6 per cent over a period not exceeding the next 24 
  month period before formally adopting the recommended target of 4 per cent inflation with a 
  band of +/- 2 per cent. The Committee is also of the view that this transition path should be 
  clearly communicated to the public. 
  
  Box II.4: Glide Path for Inflation Targets: Case Studies of Chile and Czech Republic 
  
  Since Indias CPI inflation has persisted at a high level over successive years, the experience of 
  countries such as Chile and Czechoslovakia could be particularly useful. 
  
  The Central Bank of Chile adopted inflation targeting in September 1990 when the countrys 
  level of inflation was over 25 per cent. It announced its first annual inflation target in a range of 
  15-20 per cent for 1991. The inflation target for each successive year was set at a somewhat 
  lower level than in the previous year. For example, the inflation target range was revised down to 
  13-16 per cent for 1992. In 1995, however, it adopted a point target. The point target was also 
  gradually lowered from 8 per cent in 1995 to 3.5 per cent in 2000. After reaching a reasonably 
  steady-state inflation rate in 1999, the Central Bank of Chile announced its inflation target as 2 
  per cent with a tolerance band of 1 per cent point in either direction, to be achieved over the time 
  horizon of 2 years. Chart 1 shows the cautious and gradual approach to adoption of a low 
  inflation target; almost one decade of transition to explicit inflation targeting. 
  
  II.44 Since food and fuel account for more than 57 per cent of the CPI on which the direct 
  influence of monetary policy is limited, the commitment to the nominal anchor would need to be 
  demonstrated by timely monetary policy response to risks from second round effects and 
  inflation expectations in response to shocks to food and fuel. 
  
  5.2. Institutional Requirements 
  
  II.45. While inflation is clearly a monetary phenomenon in the medium run, several nonmonetary 
  factors  both domestic and external; supply side and demand side  can lead to significant 
  deviations from the target in the short run, which may also impact the medium-term path through 
  persistence and unanchored inflation expectations. It is necessary, therefore, that the adoption of 
  flexible inflation targeting is based on reasonably clear identification of the pre-conditions. In 
  India, building on the reputational bonus from adherence to fiscal targets in 2012-13, the 
  Government must commit on a priority basis to a re-invigoration of the mediumterm fiscal 
  consolidation, as was pursued under the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management 
+ 
- (FRRBM) Act, 200325. The Committee is of the view that the goal of reducing the central 
+ (FRRBM) Act, 200325. The Committee is of the view that the goal of reducing the central 
? +

  government deficit to 3 per cent of GDP by 2016-17 is necessary and achievable. Towards this 
  objective, the Government must set a path of fiscal consolidation with zero or few escape 
  clauses; ideally this should be legislated and publicly communicated. The Report of the 
- 
- Committee on Roadmap for Fiscal Consolidation, 2012 (Chairman: Vijay L. Kelkar) already 
? -

+ Committee on Roadmap for Fiscal Consolidation, 2012 (Chairman: Vijay L. Kelkar) already 
  provides a path for the period up to 2014-1526. Furthermore, it may be important to identify and 
  address other fiscal/ administrative sources of pressure on inflation/drivers of inflation 
  persistence. For instance, the design of programmes like Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
  Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) provide a sustained upward push to nominal wages 
  unrelated to productivity growth, and the National Food Security Act which could increase 
  demand for foodgrains without corresponding efforts to augment supply. A policy induced wage-
  price/cost-price spiral can be damaging for the credibility of an inflation targeting framework. 
  The burden on monetary policy to compensate for these sources of inflation pressure is 
  correspondingly higher. 
  
  II.46. The Committee recognises that excessive emphasis on pre-conditions may delay the 
  adoption of flexible inflation targeting, and in fact, very few inflation targeting countries 
  achieved all the preconditions before formal adoption of the framework. Many inflation targeting 
  countries got instrument independence, achieved more transparency in terms of publication of 
  inflation target/reports, and continued to manage the exchange rate after the switch over to 
  inflation targeting. Fiscal discipline generally turned out to be the biggest immediate advantage 
  of formal adoption of inflation targeting (Table II.4). 
  
  Recommendations 
  
  II.47. Consistent with the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (Amendment) Rules, 
  2013, the Central Government needs to ensure that its fiscal deficit as a ratio to GDP is brought 
  down to 3.0 per cent by 2016-17. 
  
  II.48. Administered setting of prices, wages and interest rates are significant impediments to 
  monetary policy transmission and achievement of the price stability objective, requiring a 
  commitment from the Government towards their elimination . 
  
  II.49. Finally, communication and transparency is important for any monetary policy framework, 
  but more so for flexible inflation targeting (Appendix Tables II.6A and B). There are several 
  factors that demand clearer communication on monetary policy. First, every democratic society 
  requires public institutions that are accountable. The central bank must explain how it uses its 
  monopoly power over money to attain the goals assigned to it by the elected government. 
  Secondly, in a market economy, a central bank has to rely on financial markets for transmission 
  of its policies. It must, therefore, provide frequent assessments on macro-financial conditions 
  (credible information for the markets) and clarify the intent of the policy stance. This is 
  necessary for enhancing policy effectiveness and containing destabilising expectations. 
  Frameworks with inflation as a nominal anchor emphasise transparency in the form of public 
  release of inflation reports, monetary policy committee minutes, projected inflation path with fan 
  charts and open letters to explain deviations from the inflation target27. These aspects are 
  addressed in Chapter III. 
  
-  
+  
  
- 1The Balassa-Samuelson effect implies that this offset need not be one-for-one if Indias 
? -

+ 1The Balassa-Samuelson effect implies that this offset need not be one-for-one if Indias 
  productivity growth is higher than other countries. 
  
  2 Growing volatility of inflation and the growing departure of relative prices from the values 
  that market prices alone would set combine to render the economic system less efficient, to 
  introduce frictions in all markets and very likely to raise the recorded rate of unemployment 
  (Friedman 1977).There exists a non-zero rate of inflation where unemployment is the lowest and 
  operating with inflation either higher or lower leads to a higher rate of unemployment in the 
  long-run (Akerlof et al., 2000). Empirical estimates from a growth accounting framework 
  suggest that inflation reduces growth by reducing investment and productivity growth (Fischer 
  1993). This is also found to hold in a cross-country framework (Barro 1995). 
  
  George, A. A., Dickens, W. T., and G. L. Perry (2000): Near-Rational Wage and Price Setting 
  and the Long Run Phillips Curve, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1- 60. 
  
  Barro, R. J. (1995): Inflation and Economic Growth, NBER Working Paper 5326, October. 
  
  Fischer, S. (1993): The role of macroeconomic factors in growth, Journal of Monetary 
  Economics, 32(3), 485-512. 
  
  Friedman, M. (1977): Nobel Lecture: Inflation and Unemployment, Journal of Political 
  Economy, 85(3), 451-472. 
  
  3The problem of time inconsistency pertains to an agent (say a central bank) announcing a 
  certain action for a future time point and not implementing the action when that time point is 
  reached due to a preference for a different action. Hence, there is lack of consistency in the 
  preferred course of action at various points of time. Also, other rational economic agents expect 
  this renege on promise from the first agent. 
  
  4Kohn, D. (2007): Success and Failure of Monetary Policy since the 1950s, Speech at 
  Monetary Policy over Fifty Years, a conference to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the Deutsche 
  Bundesbank, Frankfurt, Germany. 
  
  Levin, A. T., Natalucci, F. M., and J. M. Piger (2004): Th e Macroeconomic Eff ects of 
  Inflation Targeting, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 86(4), 51-80. 
  
  Mishkin, F. (2004): Why the Federal Reserve Should Adopt Inflation Targeting, International 
  Finance, 7(1), 117-27. 
  
  Svensson, L. E.O (1997): Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation 
  Targets, European Economic Review, 41(6), 1111-1146. 
  
  Swanson, E. (2006): Would an Inflation Target Help Anchor U.S. Inflation Expectations?, 
  FRBSF Economic Letter, (Aug 11). 
  
  5The ITL countries choose not to adopt a fixed exchange rate because it would leave them 
  vulnerable to a speculative attack, Yet they do not become full-fledged inflation targeters 
  because of constraints, such as the absence of a sufficiently strong fiscal position. Often, ITL is 
  used as a transitional approachaiming at maintaining monetary stability until the 
  implementation of structural reforms in support of a single nominal anchor. Poland, for example, 
  switched from monetary targeting to ITL before making the full transition to inflation targeting. 
  http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/basics/target.htm 
  
  6The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judges that inflation at the rate of 2 per cent (as 
  measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures) is 
  most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserves mandate for price stability and 
  maximum employmentThe FOMC implements monetary policy to help maintain an 
  inflation rate of 2 per cent over the medium term. 
  http://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/money_12848.htm 
  
  7 In Chile, the interest rate on indexed bonds served as the real anchor during 1985 to 2001. 
  
  8 Other real variables such as output growth or unemployment cannot serve the purpose of 
  credible real anchors since it is well established that monetary policy is neutral in the long run. 
  The US, however, recently announced an explicit unemployment target  to keep interest rates 
  low till unemployment falls below 6.5 per cent. This is consistent with what monetary policy can 
  do, i.e., to bring actual unemployment closer to the natural unemployment level or actual growth 
  closer to the potential growth level. 
  
  9 Report on Currency and Finance, 2009-12, Reserve Bank of India. 
  http://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/AnnualPublications.aspx?head=Report%20on%20Currency%20and
  %20Finance 
  
  10The facility of ad hoc treasury bills led to automatic monetisation of the governments deficit. 
  Whenever the Government of India was in need of cash, it would issue non-marketable 91-day 
  Treasury bills (TBs) to the RBI. This facility was phased out from April 1997. Besides, the 
  Government of India also issued 91-day TBs on tap at a fixed discount of 4.6 per cent per 
  annum, that were mostly taken up by banks. Since the RBI rediscounted the tap TBs, it added to 
  monetisation of fiscal deficits and attenuation of monetary policy. 
  
  11The RBI Annual Monetary Policy Statement (April 1998), while proposing the adoption of a 
  multiple indicator approach, highlighted the challenges associated with the use of a single (a 
  few) indicator(s), in particular monetary aggregates, monetary conditions index and interest 
  rates. While financial innovations were increasingly becoming a source of uncertainty for the 
  assessment of money demand, information on price movements in financial markets were not 
  enough to construct a reliable measure of monetary conditions index, and the interest channel of 
  transmission of monetary policy was still evolving. Against this backdrop, it was felt appropriate 
  that a few key indicators may be used in conjunction with other indicators for purposes of policy 
  making. 
  
  12Mishra, A. and V. Mishra (2011): Inflation Targeting in India: A Comparison with the 
  Multiple Indicator Approach, Journal of Asian Economics, 23(1), 86-98. 
  
  13Patra, M. D, Khundrakpam, J. and A. T. George (2013): Post-global Crisis Inflation Dynamics 
  in India, The Brookings Institution-NCAER, India Policy Forum, July. 
  
  14Ito, T (2013): We are All FIT-ers Now: Is Flexible Inflation Targeting Fit to a New Financial 
  Environment?, Bank of Thailand and IMF Conference, November 1-2. 
  
  15The RBI does not target a specific rate or level for the exchange rate. The RBI intervenes in the 
  market only to smooth exchange rate volatility and prevent disruptions to macroeconomic 
  stability. 
  
  16Moreno, R. (2009): Some Issues in Measuring and Tracking Prices in Emerging Market 
  Economies, Chapter in Monetary Policy and the Measurement of Inflation: Prices, Wages and 
  Expectations, BIS Papers, 49, December, 13-51. 
  
  17Bank of England (2013): Monetary Policy Trade-offs and Forward Guidance, available at 
  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2013/ir13augforwardg
  uidance.pdf 
  
  18See Annex 1 for causal relation between CPI and WPI for food and core components. 
  
  19IMF (2013): The Dog that Didnt Bark: Has Inflation been Muzzled or was it Just Sleeping?, 
  Chapter 3, World Economic Outlook, April. 
  
  20The experience of both AEs and EMEs, in particular the UK, Israel, Brazil, Korea, and 
  Indonesia suggests that food inflation often deviates from the headline inflation over a sustained 
  period before converging to headline inflation. Cross-country assessment suggests that food price 
  shocks tend to have larger effects on headline inflation in EMEs than in AEs. Moreover, since 
  inflation expectations are weakly anchored in EMEs, food price shocks have larger effects on 
  inflation expectations also. A striking finding is that EMEs operating with IT often exhibit better 
  performance in managing medium-term inflation expectations in response to food price shocks, 
  almost mirroring the performance of AEs operating with IT, whereas EMEs that do not have IT 
  seem to experience inflation expectations five years ahead rising in response to an adverse food 
  price shock (IMF, WEO September 2011). 
  
  21...For policy makers, our main message is that holding inflation below 2 per cent or above 3.5 
  per cent likely entails significant permanent losses in employment in either country (US and 
  Canada) and that permanent unemployment will probably be minimized at some inflation rate in 
  the 2 to 3.5 per cent range....Taking into account the usual statistical uncertainty, we conclude 
  that monetary policy can have a major lasting impact on prosperity, not by achieving full price 
  stability, but by searching for the unemployment-minimizing inflation rate in the range of 2 to 
  3.5 per cent.(Fortin, P., Akerlof, G. A., Dickens, W. T. and G. L. Perry (2002): Inflation and 
  Unemployment in the U.S. and Canada: A Common Framework, Brookings Institution UQAM 
  Working Paper, 20/16, July). 
  
  22Jonas, J. and F. S. Mishkin (2003): Inflation targeting in transition countries: Experience and 
  prospects, NBER Working Papers, w9667, http://www.nber.org/papers/w9667. 
  
  23The estimate of 6 per cent inflation as an upper bound is subject to the Lucas critique; under an 
  IT regime inflation expectations can well be anchored at a lower level. 
  
  24The control of inflation is also imperfect because it is affected by unobservable shocks. Some 
  deviation of inflation from the target is unavoidable and does not mean that the price stability 
  objective has been disregarded. 
  
  25The Parliament, in August 2003, voted for the FRBM Act (the bill was first introduced in 
  Parliament in December 2000). The Act was amended in July 2004, with the terminal date for 
  achieving the numerical targets pertaining to fiscal indicators extended by one year to 2008-09; 
  the annual targets for fiscal correction were specified by Rules formed under the Act. 
  
  26Report of the Committee on Roadmap for Fiscal Consolidation, 2012 (Chairman: Vijay L. 
  Kelkar), Ministry of Finance, Government of India, September. 
  
  27Cavoli, T., and Rajan, R. S. (2008): Open Economy Inflation Targeting Arrangements and 
  Monetary Policy Rules: Application to India, Indian Growth and Development Review, 1(2), 
  237-251. 
  
  1. Introduction 
  
  III.1. A central banks success depends on the quality of its decisions. Even with a clear target, 
  suitable instruments and full insulation from outside pressures, a central bank cannot possibly 
  foresee all contingencies. Eventually, its decision has to depend on judgment and, therefore, 
  some discretion, which is best bounded by credible and transparent institutional accountability, is 
  unavoidable. It is in this context that monetary policy decision-making has undergone a silent 
  transformation1. The practice of Governor as the single decision-maker is being replaced by 
  committees and no country has yet replaced a committee with a single decision-maker. The 
  benefits attributed to a committee-based approach are: gathering more and better information; 
  pooling different conclusions, potentially reducing errors; insurance against strong individual 
  preferences; and peer reviews promoting openness of interaction and independence. On the other 
  hand, several costs have also been identified: free riding (not contributing fully to decision-
  making); inertia (could be easily embedded in decisions tending to status quo even as a default 
  option); and groupthink. Key to the implementation of the monetary policy decision, irrespective 
  of whether it is taken collegially or by a single decisionmaker, are: (a) an operating framework 
  that enables the alignment of suitable instruments to final goals; (b) benchmarking the path set 
  for policy instruments against rules developed through rigorous analysis of complex and fast 
  changing macro dynamics, including structural macro models, dynamic stochastic general 
  equilibrium (DSGE) models and Taylor rule type formulations; (c) avoidance of perverse 
  incentives, such as seeking to influence the gilt yield curve, inhibiting price discovery, impeding 
  monetary transmission, and potentially creating a conflict with the monetary authoritys primary 
  objective; and (d) sensitivity to financial stability concerns. 
  
  2. Organisational Structure for Decision-making: The International Experience 
  
  III.2. The organisational structure of the decisionmaking process in monetary policy varies 
  across countries. Most central banks have adopted a committee approach for monetary policy 
  decisions. Among major non-inflation targeting central banks is the US, where the Board of 
  Governors of the Fed is responsible for the discount rate and reserve requirements, while the 
  Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is responsible for announcing the Fed Funds target 
  rate. In Japan, the stance of monetary policy is decided by the Policy Board at Monetary Policy 
  Meetings (MPMs). In China, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) is a consultative body, 
  which has an advisory role in the context of comprehensive research on the macroeconomic 
  situation and the macro targets set by the State Council, which is also entrusted with the 
  monetary policy decision. 
  
  III.3. The monetary policy decision-making process in inflation targeting countries can be 
  broadly summarised as follows2: 
  
    Most inflation targeting central banks have an MPC which is involved with decision-
  
  making. 
  
    The final decision on monetary policy is taken by the board of central banks in many 
  
  countries (thirteen) while in other (eleven) countries the decision is made by the MPC. 
  There are also countries where the MPC makes recommendations to the board, which 
  then takes the final decision. 
  
    The size and composition of committees vary across countries. The number of members 
  range from five to ten. Among inflation targeting countries, about half have no external 
  members in their MPCs. 
  
    The Government does not have representation in the MPC in most countries (except in 
  
  Colombia, Guatemala and the Philippines). 
  
    Appointment of the members of the MPC is decided by the board of central banks or the 
  central bank Governor in some countries (Israel, Serbia, South Africa); in others, they are 
  appointed by the Government (UK, Poland, Mexico, Indonesia). 
  
    Decision-making in MPCs is mostly by voting while about eight countries arrive at 
  
   
  
  monetary policy decisions through a consensus. 
  In 12 countries, the MPC meets every month, and most countries have MPC meetings at 
  least bi-monthly. 
  
  III.4. The major rationale for entrusting the task of monetary policy decision to a specialised 
  committee appears to be that monetary policy formulation requires considerable knowledge and 
  expertise on the subject domain. A committee also brings in participation from different 
  stakeholders as well as diverse opinion which could help in improving the representativeness in 
  the overall decision-making process. Collective wisdom of a group makes the whole somewhat 
  greater than the sum of its parts because it does not simply mimic the views of (a) the average 
  voter, (b) the median voter, and (c) the most skillful member (Blinder, 2008)3. This view is 
  supported by experimental evidence (Blinder and Morgan, 2005)4 and a cross country 
  assessment of performance of MPCs in about 40 countries (Maier, 2010)5. 
  
  2.1 Accountability 
  
  III.5. Central bank accountability is the mechanism through which a system of checks and 
  balances is established for the central bank in a democratic setup. Formally, central banks are 
  accountable to the Government or the Parliament, from where they derive their statutory 
  authority. In practice, they are typically made accountable to legislative committees, ministers of 
  finance, or supervisory boards. The choice of accountability mechanisms generally depends on 
  the nature of the central banks responsibilities. The mechanisms used for easily observable and 
  quantifiable objectives, such as price stability, are different from those for objectives that are 
  hard to measure, such as financial stability, or not easy to observe, such as the stewardship of 
  resources (BIS, 2009)6 . 
  
  III.6. In some countries (e.g., New Zealand), the central bank Governor is legally the sole 
  decisionmaker, which makes it especially clear whom to hold responsible. In most other central 
  banks, however, decisions are made by a board, committee or council, which gives rise to the 
  issue of collective versus individual responsibility. There are several formal mechanisms through 
  which central banks are held accountable for their activities: (i) monitoring by the government or 
  legislature, (ii) publication of regular central bank reports, and (iii) tacit endorsement (the 
  government or Parliament in about one-fifth of countries has explicit power to provide formal 
  directives to the central bank, to override decisions or otherwise change the course of policy) 
  (BIS, 2009). 
  
  III.7. The vast majority of central banks have published targets (in particular, for monetary 
  policy), but only a limited number  about 20 per cent and mostly in industrialised countries  
  are subject to formal procedures when targets are missed. Typically this involves additional 
  reporting requirements to explain the reasons for missing the target as well as the measures and 
  time frame needed to meet the target. Another potential remedial action is no reappointment or 
  even dismissal. But, often, central bank officials can be dismissed only in cases of serious 
  misconduct or incapacity and rarely because of poor performance. Most central banks, and 
  nearly all in EMEs, are regularly monitored by their legislatures. In some countries, the relevant 
  legislative bodies have addressed the problem of expertise by formally consulting external 
  experts on monetary policy matters7 (BIS, 2009). 
  
  3. Organisational Structure for Monetary Policy Decisions in the RBI 
  
  III.8. The responsibility, accountability and timing of decision-making relating to monetary 
  policy remains with the Governor who is directly accountable to the Government of India. The 
  RBI Act states that the Central Government shall appoint and remove the Governor and may 
  give the RBI directions in the public interest8. 
  
  III.9. Thus, in India, monetary policy decisions are made by the Governor alone. Indeed, 
  quarterly policy statements are issued in the Governors name9. The process of monetary policy 
  formulation in the RBI has, therefore, been traditionally internal. For policy formulation, the 
  Governor is assisted by Deputy Governors, with one Deputy Governor specifically entrusted 
  with the responsibility for monetary policy setting and conduct, and is guided by the inputs 
  received from the Committee of the Central Board of Directors that meets every week to review 
  monetary, economic and financial conditions. 
  
  III.10. Over time, the monetary policy formulation process has become more consultative and 
  participative with an external orientation. Following the introduction of quarterly policy reviews 
  (April/May, July, October and January) in 2005, the RBI set up a Technical Advisory Committee 
  on Monetary Policy (TACMP) in July of the same year with external experts in the areas of 
  monetary economics, central banking, financial markets and public finance. The Committee is 
  chaired by the Governor, with the Deputy Governor in charge of monetary policy as the vice-
  chairman and the other Deputy Governors of the RBI as internal members. The Committee meets 
  at least once in a quarter, reviews macroeconomic and monetary developments and advises the 
  RBI on the appropriate stance of monetary policy. It also provides policy recommendations for 
  mid-quarter reviews, which were introduced in 2010. The role of the TACMP is purely advisory 
  in nature. Beginning with the meeting held in January 2011, the main points of discussions of the 
  TACMP are placed in the public domain, with a lag of roughly four weeks after the meeting of 
  the Committee. Members of TACMP have agreed not to speak in public on issues relating to 
  monetary policy from ten days before the TACMP meeting up to one day after the policy 
  announcement though members may express their views in public in other periods in their 
  individual capacity. This shut period is a selfimposed discipline. 
  
  III.11. With effect from October 2005, the RBI introduced pre-policy consultation meetings with 
  representatives of different segments of the banking sector, trade and industry bodies, financial 
  market participants, credit rating agencies and other institutions. Since 2009, the RBI has also 
  been holding consultations with senior economists and market analysts twice a year in the run up 
  to the annual policy and the second quarter review. 
  
  III.12. To bring in transparency in the process of policy formation, the RBI places in public 
  domain all data/inputs that go into the formulation of monetary policy  its internal 
  macroeconomic assessment and results of surveys10 in the form of a report entitled 
  Macroeconomic and Monetary Developments. 
  
  3.1 RBIs Accountability 
  
  III.13. The Reserve Bank of India Act does not prescribe any formal mechanism for 
  accountability. Over the years, however, certain practices for accountability have evolved. The 
  RBI sets the rationale of its policies and indicates possible expected outcomes. The Governor 
  holds a regular media conference after every quarterly policy review which is an open house for 
  questions, not just related to monetary policy, but the entire domain of activities of the RBI. The 
  RBI also assists the Finance Minister in answering Parliament questions relating to its domain. 
  Most importantly, the Governor appears before the Parliaments Standing Committee on Finance 
  whenever summoned, which happens on an average three to four times a year (Subbarao, 
  2013)11. 
  
  III.14. The Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission (FSLRC) makes a strong case for 
  monetary policy independence with accountability and recommends that independence needs to 
  be accompanied by legal and administrative processes that clearly delineate the functioning of 
  the regulator from the rest of the Government. Outlining the parameters of accountability, the 
  FSLRC specifies that in the event of a failure (to be defined clearly), the head of the central bank 
  would have to: (a) write a document explaining the reasons for these failures; (b) propose a 
  
  programme of action; (c) demonstrate how this programme addresses the problems that have 
  hindered the achievement of the target(s); and (d) specify a time horizon over which the MPC 
  expects the target to be achieved. A further check is envisaged in the form of a reserve power 
  granted to the Central Government to issue directions to the central bank on issues of monetary 
  policy under certain extreme circumstances. Given the drastic nature of this power, any direction 
  under this power must be approved by both Houses of Parliament and can be in force only for a 
  period of three months. Such direction may be issued in consultation with the head of the central 
  bank. 
  
  3.2 Recommendations of Earlier Committees on MPC 
  
  III.15. Several committees have recommended formation of a full-fledged monetary policy 
  committee (MPC). The Standing Committee on International Standards and Codes, 2002 
  (Chairman: Dr. Y.V. Reddy) recommended legislative changes in the RBI Act so as to facilitate 
  a mechanism for effective monetary policy. It recommended setting up of a Monetary Policy 
  Committee on the lines of the Board of Financial Supervision. 
  
  III.16. The Committee on Fuller Capital Account Convertibility, 2006 (Chairman: Shri S.S. 
  Tarapore) recommended that there should be a formal Monetary Policy Committee. It also 
  recommended that at some appropriate stage, a summary of the minutes of the Monetary Policy 
  Committee should be put in the public domain with a suitable lag. 
  
  III.17. The Committee on Financial Sector Reforms, 2009 (Chairman: Dr. Raghuram G. Rajan) 
  recommended that a Monetary Policy Committee should take a more active role in guiding 
  monetary policy actions. It should meet more regularly; its recommendations and policy 
  judgments should be made public with minimal delays. 
  
  III.18. The Committee on Financial Sector Assessment, 2009 (Chairman: Dr. Rakesh Mohan) 
  counseled on the need for strengthening the role of the TACMP and recommended that practices/ 
  procedures towards this goal be considered as it gains more experience. 
  
  III.19. The FSLRC, 2013 (Chairman: Shri B. N. Srikrishna) has recommended that : 
  
    An executive MPC should be constituted that would meet on a fixed schedule and vote to 
  
  determine the course of monetary policy. 
  
    Once the MPC has determined the policy action, the central bank would establish an 
  
  operating procedure through which the operating target would be achieved. 
  
    There should be clear accountability mechanisms through which the central bank would 
  
  be held accountable for delivering on the objectives that have been established for it. 
  
  III.20. While the FSLRC elaborated specific aspects of the decision-making process and 
  accountability mechanisms, it was of the view that other critical elements  measurement and 
  research, operating procedure, and monetary policy transmission  would take place through the 
  management process of the central bank, with oversight of the board. 
  
  3.3 Rationale for the Committees Recommendation 
  
  III.21. Heightened public interest and scrutiny of monetary policy decisions and outcomes has 
  propelled a world-wide movement towards a committee based approach to decision-making with 
  a view to bringing in greater transparency and accountability. In India, the institution of a sole 
  monetary policy decision-maker embodied in the Governor has served well in establishing 
  credibility; since 2005, however, there has also been movement towards greater consultation 
  with all stakeholders leading up to the setting up of the TACMP. With the publication of the 
  minutes of the TACMP meetings since February 2011, there has been keen public interest in the 
  views expressed in these meetings  particularly when the actual monetary policy decision has 
  not reflected the majority view  attesting to greater appreciation of diversity of view points, 
  independence of opinion and the flavour of specialized experience that TACMP members have 
  brought to these deliberations. In order to make monetary policy processes more transparent and 
  predictable, the Committee is of the view that this consultative process of monetary policy 
  making should be carried forward to its logical conclusion and formalized into a decision-
  making process in preference over the purely advisory role of the TACMP. This should bring in 
  a greater sense of involvement and ownership, as well as accountability. Several committees in 
  India have also recommended a formalized committee approach to monetary policy decision-
  making. 
  
  Recommendations 
  
  III.22. Drawing on international experience, the evolving organizational structure in the context 
  of the specifics of the Indian situation and the views of earlier committees, the Committee is of 
  the view that monetary policy decision-making should be vested in a monetary policy committee 
  (MPC). 
  
  III.23. The Governor of the RBI will be the Chairman of the MPC, the Deputy Governor in 
  charge of monetary policy will be the Vice Chairman, and the Executive Director in charge of 
  monetary policy will be a member. Two other members will be external, to be decided by the 
  Chairman and Vice Chairman on the basis of demonstrated expertise and experience in monetary 
  economics, macroeconomics, central banking, financial markets, public finance and related 
  areas. 
  
  III.24. External members will be full time with access to information/analysis generated within 
  the RBI and cannot hold any office of profit, or undertake any activity that is seen as amounting 
  to conflict of interest with the working of the MPC. The term of office of the MPC will 
  ordinarily be three years, without prospect of renewal. 
  
  III.25. Each member of the MPC will have one vote with the outcome determined by majority 
  voting, which has to be exercised without abstaining. Minutes of the proceedings of the MPC 
  will be released with a lag of two weeks from the date of the meeting. 
  
  III.26. In view of the frequency of data availability and the process of revisions in provisional 
  data, the MPC will ordinarily meet once every two months, although it should retain the 
  discretion to meet and recommend policy decisions outside the policy review cycle. 
  
  III.27. The RBI will also place a bi-annual inflation report in the public domain, drawing on the 
  experience gained with the publication of the document on Macroeconomic and Monetary 
  Developments. The Inflation Report will essentially review the analysis presented to the MPC to 
  inform its deliberations. 
  
  III.28. The Chairman, or in his absence the Vice Chairman, shall exercise a casting vote in 
  situations arising on account of unforeseen exigencies necessitating the absence of a member for 
  the MPC meeting in which voting is equally divided. 
  
  III.29. The MPC will be accountable for failure to establish and achieve the nominal anchor. 
  Failure is defined as the inability to achieve the inflation target of 4 per cent (+/- 2 per cent) for 
  three successive quarters. Such failure will require the MPC to issue a public statement, signed 
  by each member, stating the reason(s) for failure, remedial actions proposed and the likely period 
  of time over which inflation will return to the centre of the inflation target zone. 
  
  III.30. With the establishment of the MPC, there would be a need to upgrade and expand 
  analytical inputs into the decision-making process through prepolicy briefs for MPC members, 
  structured presentations on key macroeconomic variables and forecasts, simulations of suites of 
  macroeconometric models as described in Chapter II, forward looking surveys and a dedicated 
  secretariat. This will require restructuring and scaling-up of the monetary policy department 
  (MPD) in terms of skills, technology and management information systems, and its 
  reorganization. 
  
  4. International Experience  Operating Targets, Instruments and Liquidity Management 
  
  4.1 Operating Framework of Monetary policy 
  
  III.31. The operating framework is all about implementation of monetary policy. It primarily 
  involves three major aspects  choosing the operating target; choosing the intermediate target 
  and choosing the policy instruments. The operating target pertains to the variable that monetary 
  policy can directly control with its actions. The tool(s) with which the central bank seeks to 
  impact the operating target is (are) the monetary policy instrument(s). The intermediate target is 
  a variable which the central bank can hope to influence to a reasonable degree through the 
  operating target and which displays a predictable and stable relationship with the goal 
  variable(s). With growing instability in the relationship between the intermediate targets and the 
  ultimate policy variables, intermediate targets have tended to be downgraded in monetary policy 
  regimes of most central banks, although they are monitored as indicators/guides for their 
  information content. The key challenge for the liquidity desk in the central bank is to use a 
  combination of standing facilities, open market operations (OMOs) and reserve requirements to 
  achieve the operating target on a day to day basis, and thereby ensure the first leg of monetary 
  policy transmission. Assessment of liquidity to arrive at the OMO volume (i.e., repo and outright 
  taken together) that can ensure achievement of the operating target is therefore critical, but 
  remains a challenge for every central bank. 
  
  III.32. The current norm across central banks of AEs and EMEs is to have a short-term interest 
  rate as the operating target, while using liquidity management instruments to modulate the 
  
  liquidity conditions suitably so as to control the operating target (Appendix Table III.1). In the 
  US, the operating target of monetary policy is the Federal Funds rate  the rate at which banks 
  trade balances at the Federal Reserve. Similar to the US, Australia sets a target for the cash rate  
  the rate at which banks borrow from and lend to each other on an overnight, unsecured basis. 
  Australia, however, regards the cash rate as its main instrument of monetary policy. The cash 
  rate is determined by the demand and supply of exchange settlement balances that commercial 
  banks hold at the Reserve Bank of Australia. Through its open market operations, the Reserve 
  Bank of Australia alters the volume of these balances so as to keep the cash rate as close as 
  possible to its target. Similar systems prevail in Canada, New Zealand, Norway and Indonesia. 
  New Zealand adopted the official cash rate as an instrument of monetary policy in 1999; prior to 
  that, the instruments used to control inflation included influencing the supply of money and 
  signaling desired monetary conditions to the financial markets via a Monetary Conditions 
  Index. These mechanisms were, however, indirect and hazy for the markets, and were 
  eventually abandoned. In order to determine how much liquidity should be absorbed or made 
  available to maintain supply and demand equilibrium in bank balances, Bank Indonesia sets 
  targets for monetary operations each day. Since October 2008, it makes announcements of 
  banking liquidity conditions twice daily, covering both total liquidity projection and excess 
  reserves projection. In the UK, the main instrument of monetary policy is the Bank Rate (the 
  interest rate at which money is lent to financial institutions). The main operational target for the 
  Riksbank is the overnight rate which it influences by instruments such as standing facilities and 
  fine-tuning operations. The repo rate is the Riksbanks key policy signaling rate and a forecast 
  path for the repo rate is given. 
  
  III.33. Among countries that have an operating target based on a market rate of interest, the 
  Swiss National Bank (SNB) sets a target range for the three-month Swiss Franc Libor. There are 
  two main monetary policy instruments  open market operations (the SNB takes the initiative in 
  the transactions) and standing facilities (SNB merely specifies the conditions at which 
  counterparties can obtain liquidity). 
  
  III.34. Even though the short-term interest rate remains the main operating target for most central 
  banks, the Bank of Japan switched its operating target from the uncollateralized overnight call 
  rate to the monetary base in April 2013. It conducts money market operations with the explicit 
  objective of expanding the monetary base at the rate of 60-70 trillion yen annually. China uses 
  the growth rates of monetary aggregates as intermediate targets and typically employs several 
  instruments in the implementation of its monetary policyexchange rate, required reserve ratio, 
  interest rates, and open market operations12. 
  
  III.35. An analysis of 170 economies showed that, despite the post-global financial crisis scrutiny 
  of monetary policy regimes, there have not been too many instances of regime overhauls, and 
  explicit nominal anchors either in the form of fixed exchange rates or inflation targets have been 
  persevered with. The nature of operations, though, has changed from primary dependence on 
  conventional measures to extensive use of non-conventional measures, but non-conventional 
  measures only justify the need for flexibility in operations, rather than any change in the 
  operating framework meant for normal times13. 
  
  4.2 Liquidity Management 
  
  III.36. Liquidity management is key to the operating framework as it (i) ensures controllability of 
  the reserve target; (ii) ensures the first leg of monetary policy transmission by anchoring the 
  short-term money market rates to the policy rate target; and (iii) prevents disruptions in payment 
  and settlement, especially for liquidity deficit systems. In view of the market frictions that could 
  arise from institutionspecific and systemic funding liquidity problems and their interdependence, 
  all central banks attempt to institutionalise a sound liquidity management framework. The 
  specific institutional setup, however, varies to a great deal across countries  in terms of maturity 
  and frequency of operations, counterparty arrangements, and eligible collateral (Appendix Table 
  III.2). Liquidity management frameworks typically involve maximum accommodation with 
  ample discretionary provisions, particularly when short-term interest rates serve as the operating 
  target. 
  
  III.37. Standing facilities (SFs) are transparent, available to banks and other counter parties 
  without discretionary hurdles, and are generally considered as the safety valve of a liquidity 
  management system. Virtually all central banks have a standing credit facility which extends 
  funds to the deficit counterparty at a penal rate (e.g., marginal lending facility of the ECB, 
  primary and secondary credit facilities of the Fed). Eligible collaterals and tenor of borrowings, 
  however, vary across countries. The standing deposit facility, though less in use, helps to define 
  a floor rate in the inter-bank market, especially in liquidity surplus conditions. The main 
  advantage of a SF is that it gives the central bank a window to intervene in both directions, when 
  needed, to achieve the operating interest rate target, with volatility in interbank rates restricted to 
  the corridor. Reducing the volatility in the inter-bank money market rate while achieving the 
  interest rate target is both an objective and also a challenge for efficient liquidity management. 
  There is evidence of asymmetric credit and deposit SFs in some countries. 
  
  III.38. In addition to SFs, discretionary operations of a central bank could be classified under two 
  broad heads, viz., (a) the main refinance operations and (b) other discretionary operations. Under 
  the main refinance operations, the most common instruments are OMOs, which are conducted on 
  a pre-announced date by a central bank with voluntary participation from banks and primary 
  dealers (PDs). Ideally, OMOs are used for both lending and borrowing, and include both outright 
  purchase and repurchase agreements, depending upon the nature of liquidity requirements  
  structural or frictional. Some countries use both short term and long term repos (e.g., UK) and 
  others use central bank bills (Switzerland) and stabilisation bonds (Korea) to manage liquidity. 
  Other discretionary operations to manage liquidity are mainly in response to unexpected short-
  term developments requiring non-standard, non-regular operations. Such operations include 
  forex-swaps (Australia, Singapore), term deposits (Australia), compulsory deposits (Mexico), 
  additional loans and deposits (Sweden) and funding for lending (UK). 
  
  III.39. Among the terms and conditions, eligibility of collateral is one of the most important 
  aspects of liquidity management. All major central banks include public sector securities of their 
  own country as eligible collateral. Since mid-2007, the eligibility frame has been widened in 
  several countries to include financial entity debt (Japan, Mexico, Sweden and UK), covered 
  bonds (Australia and UK), other asset backed securities (Australia, Canada, Mexico and UK), 
  corporate debt and loans and other credit claims (Canada and UK) and cross-border collateral 
  (Australia, Japan, Mexico and Singapore). With increased acceptance of diversified securities as 
  
  collateral, countries have also adopted different policies relating to pricing, initial margins and 
  haircuts. 
  
  III.40. As regards tenor of the liquidity facility, most central banks provide an overnight window, 
  but country experiences show many instances of access to liquidity beyond overnight (for 
  instance, the repo operation is up to one year in Australia and Japan, 65 days in the USA, one 
  week in Korea, Switzerland and Sweden, and 25 days in Mexico). The frequency of such 
  operations also varies considerably across countries, with short-term repos on a daily/weekly 
  basis, but also with longer-term operations once in a month or as per the discretion of the central 
  bank. Other discretionary operations of both standardized and non-standardized nature vary from 
  intra-day provision of liquidity several times a day (UK, Japan, Euro area) to long-term 
  sterilisation operations and sporadic use of compulsory deposits (as in Mexico). 
  
  III.41. In view of the legacy influence of monetary targeting, there is often the challenge of 
  distinguishing between liquidity management and monetary management. What is important to 
  clarify in this context is that the same set of instruments could be used for liquidity management 
  under an interest rate targeting rule and for monetary management under a monetary or reserve 
  targeting rule. Thus, every instrument of liquidity management is a monetary policy instrument 
  as well, but in an interest rate based operating framework, it is through liquidity management 
  that the operating target is attained. Other than explicit changes in the policy interest rate or 
  interest rate target  which alone should convey the stance of monetary policy  all other 
  instruments may have to be seen as primarily meant for liquidity management, but consistent 
  with the stance of monetary policy. In India, however, at least in the past few years, changes in 
  policy rates and reserve requirements have at times conveyed divergent signals, thereby 
  becoming a source of market confusion, which needs to be avoided by ensuring consistency 
  between interest rate actions and liquidity management. 
  
  4.3 Non-monetary Instruments 
  
  III.42. While the use of monetary instruments in striving to achieve monetary policy objectives is 
  quite pervasive, central banks have been employing nonmonetary instruments as part of their 
  overall policy toolkit and these instruments subserve monetary policy considerations eventually. 
  These instruments are tailored to deal with various exigencies: surges in capital flows; credit 
  allocation; pro-cyclicality and interconnectedness; and the zero lower bound on the nominal 
  interest rate, to note a few. 
  
  III.43. One set of instruments is primarily regulatory in nature: selective credit control measures 
  ranging from improving credit culture (establishing credit bureaus; credit registry; higher risk 
  weights for sensitive sectors), supervisory measures (on-site and off-site inspection of banks) and 
  moral suasion. More recently, in order to halt the downward spiral of lending and borrowing that 
  has plagued economies since the recession, central banks have activated schemes to kick-start the 
  real economy, best exemplified by the Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS) initiated in the UK in 
  July 2012 to allow commercial banks to borrow funds at a cheap rate from the central bank and 
  lend to specified households and firms. 
  
  III.44. A second set of measures, primarily financial in nature, work their way through the 
  foreign exchange market: liberalising/restricting capital flows; intervention in the foreign 
  exchange market and sterilisation operations; reserve requirements on foreign currency 
  instruments and variants of the Tobin tax. 
  
  III.45. A third set of measures is macroprudential in nature, designed to contain systemic risks. 
  More specifically, such measures seek to address two specific dimensions of systemic risk  the 
  time dimension (excessive leverage in upturns and excessive risk aversion in downturns) and the 
  crosssectional dimension or risk concentration (size, substitutability, interconnectedness) as 
  collapse of large or systemically important financial institutions can destabilise the rest of the 
  financial system14 (Table III.1). 
  
  Table III.1: Use of Macro-Prudential Instruments by Country-Groupings 
  
  Instrument 
  
  Advanced 
  
  Emerging  Total Number 
  of Countries 
  
  15 
  5 
  5 
  7 
  5 
  8 
  
  Loan-to-value 
  Debt-to-income 
  Cap on credit growth 
  Limit on foreign lending 
  Reserve requirement 
  Dynamic provisioning 
  Countercyclical capital 
  requirement 
  Restriction on profit distribution 
  Others 
  Source: Claessens, Stijn et al. (2013): Macro-Prudential Policies to Mitigate 
  Financial System Vulnerability, Journal of International Money and 
  Finance, 39. 
  
  24 
  7 
  6 
  8 
  5 
  9 
  
  6 
  13 
  
  9 
  2 
  1 
  1 
  0 
  1 
  
  0 
  
  0 
  1 
  
  2 
  
  2 
  
  6 
  12 
  
  5. The Current Operating Framework of Monetary Policy in India 
  
  III.46. The current operating framework of monetary policy was implemented in May 2011 on 
  the recommendations of the Working Group on Operating Procedure of Monetary Policy (RBI, 
  2011)15. The framework has the following distinguishing features: (a) the repo rate is the single 
  policy rate; (b) the operating target is the weighted average overnight call rate, which is aligned 
  to the repo rate through: (i) a corridor around the repo rate of 100 basis points above the repo rate 
  for the Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) and 100 basis points below the repo rate for the reverse 
  repo rate, and (ii) full accommodation liquidity management albeit with an indicative comfort 
  zone of +/- one per cent of net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) of the banking system; and 
  (c) transmission of changes in the repo rate through the weighted average call rate to the ultimate 
  goals of monetary policy without any specific intermediate target. 
  
  III.47. The transition to the current framework in which the interest rate is the operating target, 
  from the earlier regime based on reserve targeting  i.e., base money, borrowed reserves, non-
  borrowed reserves  was generally driven by two guiding considerations. First, financial sector 
  reforms largely freed the interest rate from administrative prescriptions and setting (Appendix 
  
  Table III.3), thereby enhancing its effectiveness as a transmission channel of monetary policy. 
  Second, the erosion in stability and predictability in the relationship between money aggregates, 
  output and prices with the proliferation of financial innovations, advances in technology and 
  progressive global integration. 
  
  5.1 Liquidity Management Framework and Operations in India 
  
  III.48. The liquidity management framework in India stands on two broad mutually reinforcing 
  pillars of forward looking assessment. Pillar-I is an assessment of the likely evolution of system-
  level liquidity demand based on near-term (four to six weeks) projections of autonomous drivers 
  of liquidity. This forms the basis for taking decisions on use of discretionary liquidity 
  absorbing/injecting measures to ensure that the liquidity conditions remain consistent with the 
  goal of aligning money market rates to the policy repo rate. Pillar-II is an assessment of system-
  level liquidity over a relatively longer time horizon, focusing on the likely growth in broad 
  money, bank credit and deposits, the corresponding order of base money expansion and this 
  assessment is then juxtaposed with a breakdown into autonomous and discretionary drivers of 
  liquidity derived under Pillar I. Thus, Pillar II becomes the broader information set within which 
  decisions relating to discretionary liquidity management measures are taken on the basis of Pillar 
  I assessment. 
  
  Pillar-I 
  
  III.49. The core of Pillar I is near-term forecasts of autonomous drivers of liquidity, particularly 
  demand for currency (which reflects behavior of households), demand for excess reserves (which 
  reflects behavior of the banking system), and the central governments balances with the RBI 
  (which depends on cash flows of the Government). Large fluctuations in the central 
  governments balances with the RBI lead to corresponding automatic expansion/contraction in 
  the RBIs balance sheet, which has a magnifying impact on the overall monetary conditions. For 
  the purpose of liquidity management, forex market intervention is also an autonomous driver of 
  liquidity, but since there cannot be any near term forecasts for these interventions, they are 
  considered on information as available  i.e., backward looking, impacting liquidity evolution on 
  t+2 settlement basis (Table III.2). The extent of volatility seen in the major frictional drivers of 
  liquidity has been large (Table III.3), which poses the challenge of generating credible and 
  precise short-term forecasts of liquidity demand in the system. Nevertheless, using a combination 
  of forward looking information and a backward looking assessment of the time series evolution 
  of the frictional determinants of liquidity, projections are generated on a regular basis to inform 
  the RBIs decisions on discretionary liquidity management. 
  
  Table III.2: Current Liquidity Management Framework 
  
  Autonomous Drivers of 
  Liquidity 
  
  Currency demand 
  Bank reserves  
  (required plus excess) 
  Governments deposits with 
  RBI 
  Net forex market intervention 
  
  Liquidity Management 
  
    
  
  Net LAF (repo plus MSF plus 
  reverse repo), Term Repos, 
  OMOs, CRR, CMBs, MSS, 
  Swaps, and Standing Refinance 
  Windows 
  
   
  
  Table III.3: Variations in Frictional Drivers of Liquidity since April 2012 
  
  (` crore) 
  
  Major Autonomous Determinants 
  
  Weekly Changes 
  
  Daily Changes 
  
  of Liquidity Conditions 
  
  Positive 
  
  Negative 
  
  Positive 
  
  Negative 
  
  High  Low  High  Low  High  Low  High  Low 
  
  1 Govt. cash balances with the RBI  71,692 
  2 Currency Demand 
  25,160 
  3 SCBs balances with the RBI 
  (changes in excess CRR) 
  *: Excluding the large change of `1,38,800 on July 16, 2013. 
  
  5  62,835 
  80  15,282 
  
  55,916 
  
  57  90,182 
  
  621  48,504 
  
  90 
  
  38  49,072 
  N.A. 
  
  2 
  
  571 48,090* 
  
  13  59,131 
  
  20 
  
  III.50. The RBIs discretionary liquidity management operations (primarily in the form of OMOs 
  and changes in CRR, and also in terms of fixing limits for term repos and overnight repo 
  amounts)16 is guided by the extent of LAF deficit that is reasonable at any point of time, and 
  the assessment of drivers of LAF deficit/surplus, i.e., whether frictional or structural. 
  
  Pillar-II 
  
  III.51. Broad money growth that is consistent with inflation and growth projections at the 
  beginning of the year and reviewed from time to time in a statecontingent manner provides leads 
  about the growth in base money that will be required in the system during the course of the year. 
  After accounting for autonomous drivers of liquidity and borrowed reserves (i.e., access to LAF 
  by banks), assessment of the amount of discretionary liquidity management operations becomes 
  possible, given the desirable evolution of the base money path as also the extent of LAF 
  deficit/surplus relative to a norm (communicated in the form of +/- one per cent of NDTL). Rigid 
  adherence to a base money rule is avoided due to uncertainties surrounding the relationship 
  between monetary aggregates and the ultimate goal variables. Empirical estimates point to some 
  improvement in the sensitivity of money demand to changes in the interest rate (Appendix Table 
  III.4), thus providing the rationale for anchoring the operating framework with an interest rate 
  rule. Currently, trajectories of monetary aggregates are only referred to as indicative. 
  
  5.2 Refinance Windows Undermine the Operating Framework 
  
  III.52. For an operating framework that modulates liquidity consistent with the policy rate, 
  standing sector-specific refinance facilities interfere with monetary policy transmission because 
  of the assurance such facilities provide on additional access to liquidity at rates not determined 
  by market forces. Accordingly, sector-specific refinance facilities have been phased out in India, 
  though they tend to be reopened or re-introduced in new forms on pressures by sector-specific 
  lobbies for special monetary policy support (Appendix Table III.5). Sector-specific refinance 
  facilities ultimately conflict with the goal of price stability. For a monetary policy framework 
  
  that assigns primacy to lowering inflation through monetary policy actions, it is necessary that all 
  sectorspecific liquidity facilities be discontinued, accompanied by unambiguous communication 
  that requests for sector specific liquidity support from any sector cannot be accommodated by the 
  RBI. 
  
  5.3 Recent Experience with Monetary/Liquidity Management Operating Framework and 
  Rationale for Change 
  
  III.53. The experience since the institution of the extant operating framework, especially in terms 
  of final macro outcomes has been disappointing  persistence of inflation well above the 
  threshold of 5 per cent (WPI) articulated by the RBI; and de facto monetization of the fiscal 
  deficit to the extent of 28 per cent of the overall borrowing programme of the Government on 
  average via injections of primary liquidity through OMOs. Real policy rates have been 
  persistently negative in high inflation episodes, as the operating framework does not follow a 
  rule that can limit the scope for inflation tolerance (Chart III.1)17. 
  
   
  
  III.54. Following a simple rule (illustratively the thumb rule proposed by Taylor, 1993) 18 would 
  have resulted in the repo rate path being much higher in the last few years than it has been, and 
  thereby yielding positive real policy rates (Chart III.2a). On the other hand, if the output gap and 
  inflation gap coefficients are estimated from data relating to the current and past monetary policy 
  regimes for India and used in a Taylor-type formulation, the implied repo rate paths would lie 
  lower than CPI inflation, yielding negative real policy rates (Chart III.2b). This empirical finding 
  is validated for a range of estimates (i.e., for output gaps estimated using the HP filter, 
  Christiano-Fitzgerald filter and unobserved component model, as also for CPI inflation 
  thresholds of five per cent and six per cent). Estimated coefficients from extant interest rate rules 
  in India suggest that: (i) inadequate weight was placed on inflation management in the past, and 
  (ii) the WPI was the metric used to measure inflation, resulting in policy rates that were often 
  negative in real terms vis--vis the CPI19. It may be necessary, therefore, to start with a simple 
  policy rule in terms of a real policy rate as a context specific benchmark for the MPC20, and then 
  gradually move to a Taylor type rule after securing price stability and anchoring inflation 
  
  expectations. Under a flexible inflation targeting framework, the interest rate rule should assign a 
  significantly greater weight to inflation management vis--vis other objectives. The outcome of 
  such a framework is expected to result, on average, in positive real rates of return when inflation 
  is above target. 
  
  III.55. Turning to the conduct of liquidity management operations and transmission of policy impulses, there has 
  also been blocked transmission of policy rate cuts to support growth due to the central premise of keeping the 
  system in a deficit mode and the call rate aligned to the repo rate, thereby suggesting the following limitations: 
  
  1. Liquidity management through the LAF (i.e., up to excess SLR holdings plus additional access to liquidity from 
  the MSF window by dipping 2 per cent below the required SLR) has made base money expansion endogenous. The 
  policy stance, as reflected in changes in the repo rate, and the conduct of liquidity management are often mutually 
  inconsistent and conflicting. Often, increases in policy rate have been followed up with discretionary measures to 
  ease liquidity conditions. 
  
  2. The framework is one-sided by design, suitable only to transmission of a tightening stance through the persisting 
  liquidity deficit mode in which the system is kept; consequently, the easing stance of policy between October 2011 
  and May 2013 did not transmit to arresting the growth slowdown. 
  
  3. Provision of overnight liquidity on an enduring basis at the overnight repo rate also compromised 
  liquidity/treasury planning by banks themselves resulting in this function being in effect shifted to the RBI and 
  thereby stunting the growth of the market spectrum to the overnight segment alone, dis-incentivising the 
  development of a term money market; the LAF to a degree has become a conduit for gaming central bank liquidity 
  and substituting for efforts to access market liquidity. 
  
  III.56. In order to improve transmission of policy rate changes into the spectrum of interest rates in the economy, 
  the excessive focus on the overnight segment of the money market in the existing framework has to be avoided, 
  which will be possible only if the RBI de-emphasises overnight repos for liquidity management and progressively 
  conducts its liquidity management primarily through term repos of different tenors. Development of a term money 
  market through a term-repo driven liquidity management framework could help in establishing market-based 
  benchmarks, which in turn would help improve transmission, if various financial instruments and, in particular, 
  bank deposits and loans are priced off these benchmarks. 
  
  III.57. An overall assessment would, therefore, suggest that in order to imbue credibility and effectiveness into the 
  operating framework of monetary policy in terms of achieving and establishing the nominal anchor (addressed in 
  Chapter II), it is essential to address impediments to transmission (covered in Chapter IV) and deal with the 
  challenges confronting it through design changes and refinements in the operating framework, with flexibility in the 
  use of instruments, particularly in the context of liquidity management and its consistency with the goal(s) of 
  monetary policy. 
  
  III.58. The recent experience with the use of exceptional monetary measures to contain exchange market volatility 
  and their subsequent normalization represents a break from the operating framework put in place since May 2011. 
  This experience strengthens the rationale for revamping the operating framework so as to ensure its consistency and 
  synchronicity with monetary policy objectives and stance. The RBIs current operating framework is pivoted 
  around a target for borrowed reserves in relation to net demand and time liabilities. Conditional upon this operating 
  target, it has allowed bounded movement in the call rate between the term repo rate and the MSF rate, effectively 
  
  eschewing unlimited accommodation at the repo rate of the past. Increasingly, the term repo is gaining market 
  acceptability, synchronized as it is with the reserve requirement cycle, while allowing a smooth transition away 
  from liquidity provision at the MSF rate. The term repo rate has also proved to be a more useful indicator of 
  underlying liquidity conditions since price discovery of the term premium is through variable rate auctions, unlike 
  the overnight repo rate which is a fixed rate. The successful operation of the term repo rate should incentivize the 
  development of a fuller spectrum of term money segments, thereby enabling market based benchmarks to be 
  established for pricing bank deposits and facilitating transmission of policy impulses to credit markets. The market 
  has also adjusted to the new liquidity management environment well. In this system, full accommodation of 
  liquidity demand continues because of the access to the MSF. It is necessary, therefore, that the MSF rate may be 
  set in a manner that it becomes a truly penal rate, accessed by banks under exceptional circumstances. 
  
  Recommendations 
  
  III.59. The Committee recommends that, as an overarching prerequisite, the operating framework has to subserve 
  stance and objectives of monetary policy. Accordingly, it must be redesigned around the central premise of a policy 
  rule. While several variants are available in the literature and in country practices, the Committee is of the view that 
  a simple rule defined in terms of a real policy rate (that is easily communicated and understood), is suitable to 
  Indian conditions and is consistent with the nominal anchor recommended in Chapter II. When inflation is above 
  the nominal anchor, the real policy rate is expected, on average, to be positive. The MPC could decide the extent to 
  which it is positive, with due consideration to the state of the output gap (actual output growth relative to 
  trend/potential) and to financial stability. 
  
  III.60. Against this backdrop, the Committee recommends that a phased refinement of the operating framework is 
  necessary to make it consistent with the conduct of monetary policy geared towards the establishment and 
  achievement of the nominal anchor (Table III.4). 
  
  Phase-I 
  
  III.61. In the first or transitional phase, the weighted average call rate will remain the operating target, and the 
  overnight LAF repo rate will continue as the single policy rate. The reverse repo rate and the MSF rate will be 
  calibrated off the repo rate with a spread of (+/-) 100 basis points, setting the corridor around the repo rate. The 
  repo rate will be decided by the MPC through voting. The MPC may change the spread, which, however, should be 
  as infrequent as possible to avoid policy induced uncertainty for markets. 
  
  III.62. Provision of liquidity by the RBI at the overnight repo rate will, however, be restricted to a specified ratio of 
  bank-wise net demand and time liabilities (NDTL), that is consistent with the objective of price stability. As the 14-
  day term repo rate stabilizes, central bank liquidity should be increasingly provided at the 14-day term repo rate and 
  through the introduction of 28-day, 56-day and 84-day variable rate auctioned term repos by further calibrating the 
  availability of liquidity at the overnight repo rate as necessary. 
  
  Table III.4: Proposed Operating Framework for Monetary Policy 
  
    
  
  Phase-I 
  
  Phase-II 
  
  Policy Rate to be announced 
  by the MPC 
  Operating target for monetary  Weighted average call rate. 
  
  Repo rate (overnight). 
  
  Target policy rate for short end of 
  the money market. 
  14-day term repo rate. 
  
  policy 
  Liquidity management 
  
  Full accommodation (through a 
  mix of specified amounts of 
  overnight repos at fixed rate, and 
  term repos at variable rate)  
  ECR to be phased out. 
  
  Full accommodation (primarily 
  through 14-day term repos at 
  variable rate aimed at achieving 
  the target rate, supported by fine 
  tuning through overnight 
  repos/reverse repos, longer term 
  repos and open market operations).  
  No refinance facility. 
  MSF will set the ceiling of the 
  corridor, but must be seen as a 
  truly penal rate. If the liquidity 
  taken during the fortnight through 
  14-day term repo is managed 
  effectively, there will be rare need 
  for accessing the MSF. 
  Reverse repo will be used in fine 
  tuning operations i.e., to impound 
  only daily surplus liquidity from 
  the system to ensure that money 
  market rates do not drop below the 
  policy target rate. Standing deposit 
  facility will replace reverse repo as 
  the floor of the corridor, and 
  reverse repo rates will be close to 
  the policy rate. 
  Daily reporting by banks 
  (aggregated for the system as a 
  whole) will complement the RBIs 
  assessment of liquidity. 
  
  MSF  the ceiling of the 
  corridor 
  
  As a standing facility, this will be 
  available every day. If adequate 
  liquidity is injected through 
  overnight/term repos, use of MSF 
  will be minimal. 
  
  Reverse repo rate 
  
  The floor of the corridor  but 
  transition to standing deposit 
  facility will start. 
  
  Liquidity assessment 
  
  By the RBI  based on frictional 
  and structural drivers of liquidity. 
  
  III.63. The objective should be to develop a spectrum of term repos of varying maturities with the 14-day term repo 
  as the anchor. As the term yield curve develops, it will provide external benchmarks for pricing various types of 
  financial products, particularly bank deposits, thereby enabling more efficient transmission of policy impulses 
  across markets. 
  
  III.64. During this phase, the RBI should fine-tune and sharpen its liquidity assessment with a view to be in a 
  position to set out its own assessment of banks reserves. This will warrant a juxtaposition of topdown approaches 
  that estimate banks reserves demand consistent with macroeconomic and financial conditions appropriate for 
  establishing the nominal anchor, and bottom-up approaches that aggregate bank-wise assessments of liquidity needs 
  submitted by banks themselves to the RBI on a daily basis. As these liquidity assessments become robust, they 
  should be announced for market participants prior to the commencement of market operations every day and could 
  be subjected to review and revision during the day for fine-tuning them with monetary and liquidity conditions. It is 
  envisaged that the RBI will expand capabilities to conduct liquidity operations on an intra-day basis if needed, 
  including by scaling up trading on the NDS-OM platform. 
  
  III.65. Consistent with the repo rate set by the MPC, the RBI will manage liquidity and meet the demand for 
  liquidity of the banking system using a mix of term repos, overnight repos, outright operations and the MSF. 
  
  Phase-II 
  
  III.66. As term repos for managing liquidity in the transition phase gain acceptance, the policy rate voted on by 
  the MPC will be a target rate for the short end of the money market, to be achieved through active liquidity 
  management. The 14-day term repo rate is superior to the overnight policy rate since it allows market participants 
  to hold central bank liquidity for a relatively longer period, thereby enabling them to on lend/repo term money in 
  the inter-bank market and develop market segments and yields for term transactions. More importantly, term repos 
  can wean away market participants from the passive dependence on the RBI for cash/treasury management. 
  Overnight repos under the LAF have effectively converted the discretionary liquidity facility into a standing facility 
  that could be accessed as the first resort, and precludes the development of markets that price and hedge risk. 
  Improved transmission of monetary policy thus becomes the prime objective for setting the 14-day term repo rate as 
  the operating target. 
  
  III.67. Based on its assessment of liquidity, the RBI will announce the quantity of liquidity to be supplied through 
  variable rate auctions for the 14-day term repos alongside relatively fixed amounts of liquidity provided through 
  longer-term repos. 
  
  III.68. The RBI will aim at keeping 14-day term repo auction cut-off rates at or close to the target policy rate by 
  supplementing its main policy operation (14-day term repos) with: (i) two-way outright open market operations 
  through both auctions and trading on the NDS-OM platform; (ii) fine tuning operations involving overnight 
  repos/reverse repos (with a fine spread between the repo and reverse repo rate) and (iii) discretionary changes in the 
  CRR that calibrate bank reserves to shifts in the policy stance. 
  
  III.69. The MSF rate should be set in a manner that makes it a truly penal rate to be accessed only under exceptional 
  circumstances. 
  
  III.70. An accurate assessment of borrowed and non-borrowed reserves and forward looking projections of liquidity 
  demand would assume critical importance in the framework. So far, the governments cash balances have been the 
  prime volatile autonomous driver of liquidity, making accurate liquidity projections a difficult task. Therefore, 
  continuing with reforms in the Government securities market, which envisage that the debt management function 
  should be with the Government, the cash management function should concomitantly also be with the 
  Government21. 
  
  New Instruments 
  
  III.71. To support the operating framework, the Committee recommends that some new instruments be added to the 
  toolkit of monetary policy. Firstly, to provide a floor for the new operating framework for absorption of surplus 
  liquidity from the system but without the need for providing collateral in exchange, a (low) remunerated standing 
  deposit facility may be introduced, with the discretion to set the interest rate without reference to the policy target 
  rate. The introduction of the standing deposit facility (analogous to the marginal standing facility for lending 
  purposes) will require amendment to the RBI Act for which the transitional phase may be utilised. The standing 
  deposit facility will also be used for sterilization operations, as set out in Chapter 5, with the advantage that it will 
  not require the provision of collateral for liquidity absorption  which had turned out to be a binding constraint on 
  
  the reverse repo facility in the face of surges in capital flows during 2005-08. 
  
  III.72. Secondly, term repos of longer tenor may also be conducted since term repo market segments could help in 
  establishing market based benchmarks for a variety of money market instruments and shorterterm deposits/loans. 
  
  III.73. Thirdly, dependence on market stabilisation scheme (MSS) and cash management bills (CMBs) may be 
  phased out, consistent with Government debt and cash management being taken over by the Governments Debt 
  Management Office (DMO). 
  
  III.74. Fourthly, all sector specific refinance should be phased out. 
  
  1Blinder, A. (2004): The Quiet Revolution, Central Banking Goes Modern, Yale University Press. 
  
  2This section draws heavily from State of the Art of Inflation Targeting  2012 CCBS Handbook No.29, Bank of 
  England available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/education/Documents/ccbs/handbooks/pdf/ccbshb29.pdf 
  accessed on October 24, 2013. This handbook reviewed practices prevailing in 27 inflation targeting central banks. 
  
  3Blinder, A. (2008): Making Monetary Policy by Committee, CEPS Working paper No. 167, June. 
  
  4Blinder A. and J. Morgan (2005): Are Two Heads Better than One? An Experimental Analysis of Group versus 
  Individual Decision-making, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 37(5). 
  
  5Maier, P. (2010): How Central Banks Take Decisions: An Analysis of Monetary Policy Meetings in P.L. Siklos, 
  M. T. Bohl & M. E. Woher (eds), Challenges in Central Banking: The Current Institutional Environment and 
  Forces Affecting Monetary Policy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
  
  6BIS (2009): Issues in the Governance of Central Banks, A Report by the Central Bank Governance Group, May 
  (Chap 7). Available on http://www.bis.org/publ/othp04.htm. 
  
  7An example of such an external agency is the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which usually comments on 
  monetary policy in its regular Article IV consultations. The IMF also publishes Reports on the Observance of 
  Standards and Codes (ROSCs) that summarise the extent to which certain internationally recognised standards and 
  codes are observed in areas such as monetary and financial policy transparency, banking supervision and payment 
  systems. 
  
  8 the Reserve Bank of India is a statutory corporation constituted by the Act of 1934, which is wholly under the 
  control of the Government of India.... (G.P. Wahal versus Reserve Bank of India 1983, Lab.I.C.738 (All) (D.B); 
  Reserve Bank of India versus S. Jayarajan (1996) 2 Lab.L.J.735 (SC). 
  
  9Since 2010, the RBI instituted mid-quarter reviews (4 in number in June, September, December and March) in 
  addition to quarterly policy reviews. The mid-quarter reviews are issued on the RBIs website as press releases. 
  
  10Industrial outlook; order book, inventory and capacity utilization; inflation expectations; credit conditions; 
  consumer confidence; corporate performance; and professional forecasters assessments. 
  
  11Subbarao, D (2013): Five Years of Leading the Reserve Bank - Looking Ahead by Looking Back, Tenth Nani 
  A. Palkhivala Memorial Lecture delivered in Mumbai on August 29. Available on http://www.rbi.org.in 
  
  12Morgan, Peter J. (2013): Monetary Policy Frameworks in Asia: Experience, Lessons, and Issues, ADBI 
  Working Paper Series, No. 435, September . 
  
  13Rose, Andrew (2013): Surprising Similarities: Recent Monetary Regimes of Small Economies, CEPR 
  Discussion Paper Series No. 9684, October. 
  
  14While measures addressing the time dimension are most common (capital ratios or credit growth, loan to value 
  and debt to income ratios, liquidity requirements), several countries have recently undertaken measures aimed at the 
  cross-section dimension, most notably in Switzerland (capital surcharge for systemically important entities), Korea 
  (levy on non-core liabilities of banks, with the levy rate depending on maturity) and New Zealand (core funding 
  ratio, wherein at least 75 per cent of banks total lending will have to be funded with stickier liabilities such as retail 
  deposits and wholesale borrowing maturing in more than a year). Indonesia, for example, raised reserve 
  requirements on foreign currency accounts in March and June 2011; Taiwan effected similar such measures in 
  January 2011. Chile in 1991 imposed a non-interest bearing 30 per cent reserve requirements on foreign currency 
  liabilities. In 2008, Iceland became the first industrial country in decades to impose capital controls, to limit a flight 
  of capital from its busted banks. Between 2009 and 2011 Brazil, South Korea, Thailand, Indonesia, among others, 
  introduced controls to discourage inflows of hot money that they feared would drive their currencies to 
  uncompetitive levels. 
  
  15RBI (2011): Working Group on Operating Procedure of Monetary Policy, Chairman: Deepak Mohanty, 
  available on http://www.rbi.org.in 
  
  16To address exchange market volatility, since mid-July 2013 the RBI has restricted access to borrowed reserves, 
  with caps on overnight repos and term repos. Even after normalization of the exceptional measures, limits on term 
  repos and overnight repos have become an integral part of the liquidity management apparatus. 
  
  17Back-casted CPI-Combined data used in this report are given in Appendix Table III.6. 
  
  19It is important to note that available published research on policy reaction functions of the Taylor-type 
  formulation for India have not been estimated using the CPI; the estimates generally relate to either the WPI or the 
  GDP deflator. Moreover, a policy reaction function for India, as in all other countries, employing the interest rate as 
  the policy instrument, tend to have a high coefficient for interest rate smoothing, which is ignored in the analysis 
  here. (see Gabriel et al., 2012, in Oxford Handbook of the Indian Economy, C. Ghate, (Ed.), Oxford: New York). 
  Importantly, estimated Taylor rule parameters (or any other empirical estimates) need to exhibit structural stability 
  for a central bank to exploit the estimated relationship for the conduct of policy systematically, but as the Lucas 
  critique suggests, the estimated parameters are often not structural, i.e., not policy invariant. 
  
   
  
  20Given the uncertainty about the estimated neutral real interest rate, and assuming that it will be positive for India, 
  a simple positive real policy rate rule may not be anti-inflationary when inflation persistently and sizably exceeds 
  the inflation target. However, in view of the negative real policy rate prevailing in the recent episode of high 
  inflation, the most immediate requirement would be to ensure that the real policy rate becomes positive, and once 
  the regime change is in place, the standard Taylor type rule-based approach with an appropriate weight assigned to 
  inflation could be used by the MPC. 
  
  21The Committee on Capital Account Convertibility (1997) recommended the separation of debt management from 
  monetary management. The Advisory Group on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies (2000) 
  recognised that separation of debt management and monetary policy is a necessary but not sufficient condition for 
  effective monetary policy which would also require a reasonable degree of fiscal responsibility. The RBIs Annual 
  Report 2001-02 also emphasized that the separation of debt management could greatly facilitate the performance of 
  monetary management by the RBI. The Union Budget for 2007-08 highlighted that World over, debt management 
  is distinct from monetary management. The establishment of a Debt Management Office (DMO) in the Government 
  has been advocated for quite some time. The fiscal consolidation achieved so far has encouraged us to take the first 
  step. Accordingly, I propose to set up an autonomous DMO and, in the first phase, a Middle Office will be set up to 
  facilitate the transition to a full-fledged DMO. Following this announcement, the Middle Office was established in 
  September 2008 in the Ministry of Finance. 
  
   
  
  1. Introduction 
  
  IV.1 The efficacy of monetary policy actions lies in the speed and magnitude with which they 
  achieve the final objectives. With the deepening of financial systems and growing sophistication 
  of financial markets, most monetary authorities are increasingly using indirect instruments (such 
  as policy interest rates and open market operations) rather than direct measures (like credit 
  allocation). Adjustments in the policy interest rate, for instance, directly affect shortterm money 
  market rates which then transmit the policy impulse to the fuller spectrum of interest rates in the 
  financial system, including deposit and lending rates, that in turn affect consumption, saving and 
  investment decisions of economic agents and eventually aggregate demand, output and inflation. 
  The interest rate channel of transmission has become the cornerstone of monetary policy in most 
  countries. This channel may also operate through expectations of future interest rates, and 
  thereby influence the behaviour of economic agents in an economy in a forward looking manner. 
  
  IV.2 Underdeveloped and incompletely integrated market segments inhibit the transmission of 
  monetary policy through the interest rate channel. Accordingly, some central banks operate by 
  directly altering reserve requirements alone or in conjunction with the policy interest rate to 
  affect the availability and price of credit. 
  
  IV.3 The transmission mechanism is characterised by long, variable and uncertain time lags, 
  making it difficult to predict the precise effect of monetary policy actions on the economy. Apart 
  from differential lags, there are also asymmetries involved in the quantitative responses of the 
  policy impulse to the goal variables in alternate phases of the business cycle and liquidity 
  conditions. It is generally accepted in the literature that monetary policy has limited effects on 
  aggregate supply or productive capacity, though in the presence of credit constraints, the ability 
  of firms to expand capacities is impacted, thus affecting aggregate supply1. 
  
  2. International Experience 
  
  IV.4 Monetary transmission in advanced economies occurs through several alternative channels, 
  and is generally found to be robust and efficient in normal times. In contrast, in emerging market 
  economies (EMEs), it is the credit channel that dominates transmission2. 
  
  2.1. Interest rate channel 
  
  IV.5 In the case of advanced economies (AEs), the interest rate channel works by impacting the 
  cost of capital. It has been found to be strong and has exhibited good information content about 
  future movement of real macroeconomic variables (Bernanke and Blinder, 1992)3. In the case of 
  EMEs, which do not have well-functioning capital markets for debt and equities, and in which 
  real estate markets are fragmented and illiquid, monetary transmission through the interest rate 
  has been found to be weak. Furthermore, the interest rate channel is also dulled during surges in 
  capital inflows. On an average across Asian economies, the pass-through coefficients for 
  transmission from policy rates to lending rates declined by about 30-40 basis points during 
  episodes of capital inflows, but were still about 0.3-0.6 (Jain- Chandra and Unsal, 2012)4. 
  Transmission from policy rates to money market rates and retail lending rates is found to be 
  strong in transition economies of Europe, but the transmission to longer maturity rates is rather 
  weak (gert and MacDonald, 2009)5. However, recent evidence suggests that the interest rate 
  channel is strengthening in many EMEs, including India6. This is attributed, inter alia, to reduced 
  fiscal dominance, more flexible exchange rates and development of market segments (Gumata et 
  al., 2013)7. 
  
  2.2. Credit Channel 
  
  IV.6 Empirical evidence supports the existence of the credit channel of transmission. This 
  operates by affecting the external finance premium through both the bank lending channel (by 
  decreasing the supply of bank loans in response to contractionary monetary policy) and the 
  balance sheet channel (contractionary monetary policy decreases collateral valuation and net 
  worth of firms, raises agency costs and affects firms activity levels through the financial 
  accelerator). Recent evidence from the euro area suggests that the bank lending channel was 
  more pronounced than the balance sheet channel in the case of firms, while for households, it 
  was the other way round (Cicarrelli, et al, 2010)8. The bank lending channel is also found to have 
  a larger impact on banks that are small, less capitalised and less liquid. Some evidence suggests 
  that firms substitute trade credit for bank loans at times of monetary contraction, thus weakening 
  the credit channel. This is particularly the case for EMEs. In the case of Sub-Saharan Africa, 
  excluding South Africa, the bank lending channel has been found to work feebly, given that 
  informal finance dominates credit markets and the penetration of institutional finance is limited, 
  given the low competition from the banking sector. However, in the case of many EMEs, 
  especially where bank-oriented financial systems exist, the credit channel is strong. While 
  informal finance weakens monetary transmission, experience suggests that transmission through 
  the credit channel is strong in the case of micro-finance institutions (MFIs). 
  
  2.3. Exchange Rate Channel 
  
  IV.7 An important channel of monetary transmission has been the exchange rate that is either 
  directly influenced by the central bank or gets impacted by its actions. Typically, the exchange 
  rate channel works through expenditure switching between domestic and foreign goods. For 
  instance, an appreciation of the domestic currency makes foreign goods cheaper causing demand 
  for domestic goods and net exports to fall. However, this may also reduce external debt in 
  domestic currency terms. Both effects transmit to aggregate demand and the price level. 
  Empirical evidence suggests that the exchange rate channel is strong in economies with freely 
  floating exchange rates, but its impact is dampened with central bank intervention. For instance, 
  in the case of Latin American countries, lower exchange rate flexibility relative to peers in Asia 
  seems to have resulted in weaker transmission of policy rates. 
  
  2.4. Asset Price Channel 
  
  IV.8 Apart from exchange rates, changes in other asset prices such as equities and house prices 
  also impact inflation and growth. Equity prices are dampened in response to contractionary 
  monetary policy and the resultant wealth effects and collateral valuation changes feed through to 
  consumption and investment. The asset price channel is quite weak in many EMEs where equity 
  markets are small and illiquid, but relatively strong in countries that have open equity markets. 
  Transmission is also found to be limited in countries with weak property price regimes and 
  poorly developed and illiquid real estate markets. In countries like the US and Australia, where 
  the mortgage market is well integrated with capital markets, the asset price channel turns out to 
  be quite strong. In general, stock prices respond faster to contractionary monetary policy, though 
  the intensity and lags of transmission are impacted by the liquidity in the stock markets. 
  
  2.5. Transmission Lags 
  
  IV.9 Time lags in transmission are usually long, variable and tend to differ from one country to 
  another owing to differences in economic and market structures. They also vary over time due to 
  dynamically changing macroeconomic and financial conditions. For instance, these lags are 
  found to vary from 1-14 quarters for transmission of policy rates to output across a gamut of 
  advanced and emerging economies with varied monetary arrangements. While transmission is 
  weaker in case of EMEs, it is not clear if the transmission lags are longer. In fact, some recent 
  evidence suggests longer lags for AEs relative to EMEs  for instance, average lag of 33.5 
  months for all countries; 42 months in the case of the US, 48 months for the euro area, and in the 
  range of 10-19 months for transition economies that became new EU members (Havrnek and 
  Rusnk, 2012)9. For Brazil, the monetary policy transmission through the aggregate demand 
  channel takes between 6 and 9 months: the interest rate affects consumer durables and 
  investment in between 3 to 6 months and the output gap takes an additional 3 months to have a 
  significant impact on inflation (Bogdanski et.al., 2000)10,11. 
  
  3. Sensitivity of Inflation and Output to Monetary Policy in India 
  
  IV.10 Empirical evidence indicates that monetary transmission in India has been taking place 
  through several channels (RBI, 2005; Patra and Kapur, 2010; Mohanty, 2012; Khundrakapam 
  and Jain, 2012; Khundrakapam, 2011; Kapur and Behera, 2012; Singh, 2011 and Keltzer, 
  2012)12. The broad consensus emerging from these studies is that monetary policy in India 
  
  impacts output with a lag of about 2-3 quarters and WPI headline inflation with a lag of about 3-
  4 quarters and the impact persists for 8-12 quarters. Among the channels of transmission, the 
  interest rate has been found to be the strongest. In view of the Committees choice of inflation as 
  the nominal anchor for monetary policy in India, this section primarily focuses on empirical 
  evaluation of the transmission of monetary policy signals to inflation. 
  
  3.1. Interest Rate Channel 
  
  IV.11 Monetary policy interest rate movements have been found to share a co-integrating 
  relationship with rates across different segments of financial markets. Results of block 
  exogeneity tests show that there exists bi-directional causality between call money rates and 
  interest rates in other segments such as the government debt market, credit market or returns on 
  equity market and the forex market13. Medium to long term rates such as bank deposit and 
  lending rates exhibit asymmetrical responses to policy rate changes under varied market 
  conditions, responding faster with relatively larger responses in liquidity deficit conditions than 
  in surplus conditions. Furthermore, lending rates for certain sectors such as housing and 
  automobiles respond relatively faster to policy rate changes compared with other sectors. 
  
  3.2. Credit Channel 
  
  IV.12 India is a bank-dominated economy, even though in recent years the role of equity and 
  debt markets as sources of financing of economic activities has increased. The share of banks in 
  domestic corporate borrowing has remained high (Chart IV.1). High-dependence on bank 
  finance makes the bank lending and the balance sheet channels particularly important for 
  monetary transmission, which is also evidenced through Granger causality tests14. In terms of 
  balance sheet effects, credit growth is seen to have an inverse relationship with movements in the 
  policy rate15. 
  
  3.3. Exchange Rate Channel 
  
  IV.13 The exchange rate channel is found to be feeble in India with some evidence of weak 
  exogeneity16. While changes in policy interest rates may influence movements in exchange rates, 
  the level of the exchange rate is not a policy goal, as the RBI does not target any level or band of 
  the exchange rate. Exchange rate depreciation is a key source of risk to inflation as the estimated 
  pass-through coefficients for India suggest (Table IV.1). 
  
  Table IV.1: Summary of Exchange Rate Pass-through Coefficient from Select Studies 
  
  Study 
  
  Time Period 
  
  of Study 
  
  WPI 
  
  Exchange rate pass-though coefficient 
  
  Khundrakpam (2007)17 
  
  10 per cent change in exchange rate increases final prices by 
  60 bps in short run and 90 bps in long run 
  10 per cent appreciation (depreciation) of rupee vis--vis the 
  US dollar reduces (increases) inflation by 60 bps in the same 
  quarter, while the long-run pass-through is 120 basis points. 
  Patra and Kapur (2010)20  1996 Q2 to  A 10 per cent appreciation (depreciation) of the Indian rupee 
  
  Kapur (2012)18 & Kapur 
  and Behera (2012)19 
  
  1991M8 to 
  2005M3 
  
  1996 Q2 to 
  2011 Q1 
  
  2009 Q3 
  
  1996 Q2 to 
  2013 Q1 
  
  (vis-a-vis the US dollar) would reduce (increase) inflation by 
  50 bps in the same quarter, by 150 percentage points after 
  seven quarters. 
  A 10 per cent change in the exchange rate resulted in 1.5 per 
  cent change in prices prior to the global crisis and 1.0 per cent 
  change including post crisis period. 
  
  Patra et al. (2013)21 
  
  CPI 
  
  Ghosh and Rajan (2007)22 
  
  1980Q1 to 
  2006Q4 
  
  Bhattacharya, et.al. 
  (2008)23 
  
  1997M9 to 
  2007M10 
  
  Exchange rate pass-through elasticity of the rupee-USD to 
  CPI to be between 45 and 50 percent and quite stable over the 
  period under consideration 
  One per cent increase in exchange rate causes rise in CPI level 
  by 0.10-0.11per cent in the short run and 0.04-0.17per cent in 
  the long-run 
  
  3.4. Asset Price Channel 
  
  IV.14 Empirical evidence for India indicates that asset prices, especially stock prices, react to 
  interest rate changes, but the magnitude of the impact is small (Singh and Pattanaik 2012)24. 
  Moreover, the wealth effect of increasing equity prices in the Indian case is found to be limited 
  (Singh, 2012)25. With the increasing use of formal finance (from banks and non-banks) for 
  acquisition of real estate, the asset price channel of transmission has improved. However, during 
  periods of high inflation, there is a tendency for households to shift away from financial savings 
  to other forms of savings such as gold and real estate that tend to provide a better hedge against 
  inflation. To the extent that these acquisitions are funded from informal sources, they may 
  respond less to contractionary monetary policy, thus weakening the asset price channel in India. 
  
  4. Identifying Impediments to Transmission 
  
  IV.15 In India, financial sector reforms and progressive deregulation of the financial sector 
  created pre-conditions for conducting monetary policy primarily through changes in the interest 
  rate as the main policy instrument. The effectiveness of monetary policy, however, remains 
  constrained by several country-specific factors that affect transmission of the policy impulses 
  through the interest rate channel. Some of the major factors are briefly explained below. 
  
  4.1. Sustained Fiscal Dominance 
  
  IV.16 Despite phasing out of the Reserve Banks participation in primary issuances of 
  Government securities (G-secs), fiscal dominance continues to impinge on monetary policy 
  efficacy as open market operations are intermittently deployed to manage yields in the face of 
  large government borrowings. Data for the past decade show that whenever the net market 
  borrowing of the government has increased, the ratio of incremental investment by banks in 
  government securities has gone up, leading to lower share of non-food credit in bank finance, 
  i.e., pointing to crowding out of the private sector (Chart IV.2). 
  
  i. Statutory Pre-emption through SLR 
  
  IV.17 Large government market borrowing has been supported by regulatory prescriptions under 
  which most financial institutions in India, including banks, are statutorily required to invest a 
  certain portion of their specified liabilities in government securities and/or maintain a statutory 
  liquidity ratio (SLR) (Table IV.2). 
  
  IV.18 The SLR prescription provides a captive market for government securities and helps to 
  artificially suppress the cost of borrowing for the Government, dampening the transmission of 
  interest rate changes across the term structure. It is also observed that the Government often 
  borrows at a negative real interest rate, especially in recent years (Chart IV.3). While banks 
  generally invest in government securities above the statutory prescription since excess SLR 
  securities serve as the only collateral for availing central bank resources under the LAF (Table 
  IV.3), a lower SLR prescription, ceteris paribus, is likely to decrease banks investments in G-
  secs. 
  
  ii. Small Savings Schemes 
  
  IV.19 Besides market borrowings, the other main source of funding government deficits in India 
  is small savings mobilised through, inter alia, post office deposits, saving certificates and the 
  public provident fund, characterised by administered interest rates and tax concessions. The 
  interest rates on small savings were earlier changed infrequently26. Consequently, small savings 
  in the past had acquired a competitive edge over bank deposits during the easing phase of 
  monetary policy, as was evident during 2009-10 (Chart IV.4). The resultant substitution from 
  bank deposits to small savings eroded the effectiveness of the monetary transmission 
  mechanism, especially the bank lending channel. To some degree, the annual reset for the small 
  savings rates continues to provide them a competitive edge. Therefore, the option of a half-yearly 
  or quarterly reset should be implemented. 
  
  Table IV.2: Guidelines on Investment in Centre and State Government Securities (select institutions) 
  
  Institution 
  
  Instruments 
  
  Minimum Allocation 
  
  Remarks 
  
  Gilt Funds 
  
  Life Insurance 
  Companies 
  
  Non-life Insurance 
  Companies (Pension 
  and General Annuity 
  Business) 
  
  Central Government 
  Securities and State 
  Development Loans 
  (SDL). 
  Government Securities 
  and other approved 
  securities. 
  
  100 per cent of total corpus. 
  
  50 per cent of total corpus 
  (of which 25 per cent in 
  Government Securities). 
  
  Government Securities, 
  and other approved 
  securities. 
  
  40 per cent of total corpus 
  (of which 20 per cent in 
  Government Securities). 
  
  Employees 
  Provident Fund 
  
  PFs/Retirement 
  Trusts/Gratuity 
  Funds 
  
  55 per cent of incremental 
  Central Government 
  accretions belonging to the 
  Securities, SDL and other 
  Fund. 
  approved securities. 
  25 per cent of Assets Under 
  Central Government 
  Securities; 
  Management (AUM); 
  SDL and other approved  15 per cent of AUM. 
  
  This is the cap or 
  maximum allocation.  
  
  In addition to this, there is 
  a discretionary investment 
  to the extent of 30 per cent 
  which are also generally 
  investment in SDLs. As a 
  result, total investment in 
  government paper 
  (Centre+States) is around 
  70 per cent. 
  
  Scheduled 
  Commercial Banks 
  
  Urban Co-operative 
  Banks 
  
  DICGC 
  
  securities. 
  Central Government 
  Securities, SDL and other 
  approved securities. 
  Central Government 
  Securities, SDL and other 
  approved securities. 
  Central Government 
  Securities. 
  
  23 per cent of net demand 
  and time liabilities 
  (NDTL).* 
  25 per cent of NDTL. 
  
  100 per cent of cash surplus. 
  
  *: The statutory liquidity ratio is marginally met through holdings of gold and cash as well. 
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
  Table IV.3: SLR Maintenance by Banks 
  
  (Per cent of NDTL) 
  Financial Year End  SLR Maintained  SLR prescribed 
  
  2008-09 
  2009-10 
  2010-11 
  2011-12 
  2012-13 
  
  28.1 
  28.8 
  27.1 
  27.4 
  28.0 
  
  24 
  25 
  24 
  24 
  23 
  
   
  
  iii. Subventions 
  
  IV.20 The Government also influences the monetary policy transmission channel through its 
  directives to banks. Keeping some economically and socially important objectives in mind, both 
  the Central and State Governments offer interest rate subvention to certain sectors, including 
  agriculture (Table IV.4). There have also been non-interest subventions, such as the Agricultural 
  Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme in 2008. 
  
  iv. Taxation 
  
  IV.21 The tax advantage for the fixed maturity plans (FMPs) of the debt Mutual Funds of tenors 
  of a year or more against fixed deposits of corresponding maturities also weakens the credit 
  channel of monetary transmission. Similarly, to the extent the financial products of non-banks 
  are not subjected to tax deduction at source, they have an advantage over bank deposits and 
  weaken the transmission on the same grounds. 
  
  Recommendations 
  
  IV.22 In order to address specific impediments to monetary policy transmission in India, the 
  Committee recommends the following: 
  
  (a) Consistent with the time path of fiscal consolidation mentioned in Chapter II, SLR should be 
  reduced to a level in consonance with the requirements of liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) 
  prescribed under the Basel III framework. 
  
  (b) Government should eschew suasion and directives to banks on interest rates that run counter 
  to monetary policy actions. 
  
  (c) More frequent intra-year resets of interest rates on small saving instruments, with built-in 
  automaticity linked to benchmark G-sec yields, need to be brought in. Also, the benchmark 
  
  should be based on average of the previous six months or even shorter intervals so as to better 
  capture changes in interest rate cycles within a year. 
  
  Table IV.4: Subvention Schemes in Force in the Last Two Years 
  
  1  Introduced in July 2007, there is an interest subvention on pre- and post-shipment rupee export 
  
  credit for certain employment oriented export sectors. The subvention of two per cent for the 
  financial year 2013-14 was increased to three per cent with effect from August 1, 2013. The 
  interest charged is, however, subject to a floor rate of seven per cent. Applicable to all banks and 
  EXIM Bank. 
  
  2  In 2006-07, an interest subvention was introduced to ensure availability of short-term crop loans up 
  
  to `3,00,000 to farmers at a reduced rate of seven per cent. This scheme continues with minor 
  variations. In 2013-14, with three per cent additional subvention for timely repayment, the 
  effective cost of short-term crop loan for farmers is four per cent. It was, until recently, applicable 
  to public sector banks only, but now extended to private sector. 
  
  3.  In October 2009, a scheme of one per cent interest subvention for housing loans up to `1 million 
  
  was introduced. With enhancements, in 2013-14, the one per cent subvention is available for 
  housing loans up to `1.5 million for the cost of a house up to `2.5 million. 
  
  4.  In 2013-14, the Union Budget announced working capital and term loans at a concessional interest 
  
  of six per cent to handloom weavers. This is supposed to benefit 150,000 individual weavers and 
  1,800 primary cooperative societies (mostly women and those belonging to the backward classes) 
  in 2013-14. 
  
  (d) All fixed income financial products should be treated on par with bank deposits for the 
  purpose of taxation and TDS. Further, the tax treatment of FMPs and bank deposits should also 
  be harmonised . 
  
  (e) With a sharp rise in the ratio of agricultural credit to agricultural GDP, the need for 
  subventions on interest rate for lending to certain sectors would need to be re-visited27. 
  
  4.2. Large Informal Sector and Still Significant Presence of Informal Finance 
  
  IV.23 Despite the growing reach of the formal banking and non-banking network, informal 
  finance still caters to the financing requirements of the major part of Indias population28. The 
  recourse to noninstitutional sources is relatively high, both in rural and urban areas, particularly 
  by lower income groups. Also, the cost of borrowing from informal/semi-formal sources is 
  significantly higher than that of borrowing from banks (Table IV.5). High cost itself may be an 
  impediment to transmission, particularly when incremental changes in the policy rate constitute 
  only a small fraction of the overall funding costs. Thus, the significant presence of informal 
  finance as well as its costs of intermediation can impede the impact of monetary policy on 
  aggregate demand. 
  
  Table IV.5: Cost of Credit from Various Agencies in India 
  
  Lender Category 
  
  Interest Rate (Per cent 
  
  Self Help Groups (SHGs) 
  Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) 
  
  per annum)* 
  
  18-24 
  20-24 
  
  Informal credit providers 
  Banks (small borrowal accounts) 
  *: Data pertains to 2006.  
  Source: Report on Currency and Finance, 2006-08, Reserve 
  Bank of India. 
  
  18-36 
  6-20 
  
  4.3. Financial and Credit Market Frictions, Bank Behaviour and Monetary Policy 
  
  IV.24 There are certain facets of monetary policy that interface with credit and financial markets. 
  In this context, market frictions and/or the endogenous response of the RBI to liquidity demand 
  weaken monetary transmission. 
  
  IV.25 First, on the lending side, banks determine their interest rates with reference to the base 
  rate. While banks are free to decide their base rates, they are required to take into consideration 
  factors like cost of funds, adjustment for the negative carry in respect of CRR and SLR, overhead 
  cost and a profit margin. The policy repo rate does not directly affect the determination of base 
  rate of banks, except at the margin where wholesale funding is used. Even this role has greatly 
  diminished, since wholesale funding (including borrowing from the Reserve Bank) constitute 
  barely 10 per cent of the total funds raised by banks (Table IV.6). 
  
  IV.26 Secondly, with regard to deposits, while interest rates are re-priced when policy rates 
  increase, this is only at the margin. A more complete transmission is impeded by the maturity 
  pattern being largely concentrated in fixed tenor deposits (Table IV.7). Moreover, the 
  distribution of term deposits is tilted in favour of longer duration (i.e., one year and above) 
  deposits (Table IV.8). These fixed rate deposits, together with the pursuit of inflexible net 
  interest margins by public sector banks, imparts rigidity to the entire interest rate structure. 
  Going forward, increase in competition as suggested by the Reserve Bank is necessary to impart 
  greater dynamism and flexibility to the banking structure and associated outcomes (RBI, 2013)29. 
  
  IV.27 Thirdly, the transmission of monetary policy to deposit and lending rates is sensitive to 
  liquidity conditions prevailing at the time of a policy rate change and during the period 
  thereafter. As shown in Table IV.9, cumulative increase of 175 bps in the repo rate in 2011-12 
  was transmitted to both deposit and lending rates, albeit less than proportionately. In 2012-13, 
  however, the repo rate was cut by 100 bps, but despite the cut in CRR by 75 bps, deposit and 
  lending rates did not soften much due to deficit and occasionally tight liquidity conditions. In 
  2013-14 (so far), the cumulative increase in repo rate has been 25 bps, but in the absence of any 
  CRR cuts and because of the policy induced tightness in liquidity conditions, transmission to the 
  modal deposit rate has been higher than the change in the policy rate30. Empirical research for 
  India corroborates the role of liquidity conditions in impacting the transmission  monetary 
  policy transmission is more effective during the liquidity deficit mode as compared to the surplus 
  mode (Ray and Prabhu, 2013)31. Significant asymmetry is observed in the transmission of 
  policy rate changes between the surplus and deficit liquidity conditions, suggesting that 
  maintaining suitable liquidity environment is critical to yielding improved passthrough (Singh, 
  2011,op. cit.). 
  
  Table IV.6: Asymmetry in Transmission in Different Phases of Monetary Policy Cycles  
  
  (to Deposit and Lending Rates of Banks) 
  
  Change (percentage points) 
  
    
  
  Tightening Phase 
  
  (October 26, 2005 to 
  
  October 19, 2008) 
  
  Easing Phase 
  
  (October 20, 2008 
  
  to March 18, 
  
  Tightening Phase 
  (March 19, 2010 to 
  
  April 16, 2012) 
  
  Easing Phase 
  (April 17, 2012 
  to July 15, 2013) 
  
  2010) 
  -4.25 
  
  3.00 
  
  2.38 
  
  Repo Rate 
  Modal Deposit 
  Rate 
  Modal Base Rate* 
  WALR 
  *: Base rate system was introduced from July 1, 2010. 
  N.A.=Not Available 
   
  
  -2.00 
  N.A. 
  
  3.00 
  N.A. 
  
  -2.38 
  
  3.75 
  
  2.31 
  
  2.75 
  2.08 
  
  -1.25 
  
  0.04 
  
  -0.50 
  -0.49 
  
  Table IV.7: Distribution of Current, Savings and Term Deposits-March 2012 
  (Per cent) 
  Total 
  100.0 
  100.0 
  100.0 
  100.0 
  
    
  8.8 
  SBI and Associates 
  9.1 
  Nationalised Banks 
  29.2 
  Foreign Banks 
  Private Sector Banks 
  14.3 
  Source: Basic Statistical Returns, 2011-12. 
  
  57.7 
  67.5 
  55.3 
  60.9 
  
  33.5 
  23.4 
  15.4 
  24.8 
  
  Savings 
  
  Current 
  
  Term 
  
  Table IV.8: Distribution of Maturity Pattern of Term Deposits of SCBs March 2012  Based on 
  
  Contractual Maturity 
  
  Up to 90 
  
  days 
  
  91 days and 
  above but 
  less than 6 
  
  6 months 
  and above 
  
  but less 
  
  1 year and 
  above but 
  less than 2 
  
  2 years and 
  above but 
  less than 3 
  
  3 years and 
  above but 
  less than 5 
  
   
  
    
  
  (Per cent) 
  5 years 
  
  and 
  
  above 
  
  19.5 
  7.6 
  0.8 
  4.0 
  
  months 
  
  than 1 year 
  
  SBI and Associates 
  Nationalised Banks 
  Foreign Banks 
  Private Sector Banks 
  Source: Basic Statistical Returns, 2011-12. 
  
  4.1 
  6.6 
  34.3 
  10.4 
  
  4.8 
  6.5 
  12.7 
  12.5 
  
  5.4 
  11.8 
  9.8 
  13.8 
  
  years 
  38.9 
  49.9 
  34.9 
  43.1 
  
  years 
  15.7 
  6.7 
  3.9 
  11.1 
  
  years 
  11.6 
  10.9 
  3.6 
  5.2 
  
   
  
  Table IV.9: Monetary Policy Transmission and Liquidity Conditions 
  
  Period 
  
  Change in Policy  
  
  Average Liquidity 
  
  Q4 (2010-11) 
  2011-12 
  Q1 
  Q2 
  Q3 
  
  Rates (bps) 
  
  Repo Rate 
  
  CRR 
  
  Deficit* 
  (` billion) 
  
  50 
    
  75 
  75 
  25 
  
  - 
    
  - 
  - 
  - 
  
  -464 
  
    
  
  -378 
  -453 
  -916 
  
  Modal 
  Deposit 
  
  Rate 
  6.65 
  
    
  
  7.08 
  7.44 
  7.46 
  
  Modal 
  Base 
  Rate 
  9.00 
  
    
  
  9.50 
  10.25 
  10.50 
  
  WALR 
  
  11.40 
    
  11.45 
  11.71 
  12.24 
  
  175 
  
  -50 
  
  - 
  
    
  
  - 
  - 
  
  -50 
  -100 
  
  -125 
  -125 
  
  7.42 
  0.77 
  
    
  
  -1341 
  -772 
  
    
  
  10.50 
  1.50 
  
    
  
  Q4 
  Change during the year 
  2012-13 
  Q1 
  Q2 
  Q3 
  Q4 
  Change during the year 
  2013-14 
  Q1 
  Q2 
  Q3 
  Change up to Q3 
  *: Include Repo, Reverse Repo, Term repo, MSF and ECR; #: Data relate to November; - : No 
  change. 
  
  12.58 
  1.18 
    
  12.39 
  12.30 
  12.18 
  12.18 
  -0.40 
    
  12.11 
  10.20 
  12.21 
  10.25 
  10.25  12.15# 
  0.05 
  -0.03 
  
  -937 
  -543 
  -1046 
  -1101 
  -907 
  
  10.50 
  10.45 
  10.25 
  10.20 
  -0.30 
  
  7.40 
  7.29 
  7.33 
  7.31 
  -0.11 
  
  -847 
  -1007 
  -856 
  -903 
  
    
  
  7.26 
  7.46 
  7.65 
  0.34 
  
    
  
  -25 
  25 
  25 
  25 
  
    
  - 
  
  -25 
  -25 
  -25 
  -75 
  
    
  
    
  
    
  - 
  - 
  - 
  - 
  
  Recommendations 
  
  IV.28 Unless the cost of banks liabilities moves in line with the policy rates as do interest rates 
  in money market and debt market segments, it will be difficult to persuade banks to price their 
  loans in response to policy rate changes. Hence, it is necessary to develop a culture of 
  establishing external benchmarks for setting interest rates based on which financial products can 
  be priced. Ideally, these benchmarks should emerge from market practices. However, the 
  Committee is of the view that the Reserve Bank could explore whether it can play a more active 
  supportive role in its emergence. 
  
  IV.29 The RBIs liquidity management operations should strive to ensure consistency with the 
  stance of monetary policy. Accordingly, an increase in the policy rate to convey an anti-inflation 
  policy stance should be accompanied by tightening of liquidity conditions through liquidity 
  management operations, whereas an easing of the policy stance should be associated with 
  accommodative liquidity conditions. 
  
  IV.30 The Committee is also of the view that there should be close coordination between the 
  settings of monetary policy and macro-prudential policies, since variations in macro-prudential 
  instruments such as capital buffers, provisions, loan-to-value ratios and the like impacts the cost 
  structures and lendable resources of banks, thereby impacting monetary transmission. 
  
  4.4. Other Aspects of Monetary Policy Transmission 
  
  i. High Inflation and Financial Disintermediation 
  
  IV.31 High inflation in itself impedes transmission of monetary policy. This impact is 
  exacerbated if interest rates on financial products do not adjust to inflation and yield negative 
  returns. In India, gold and real estate compete with deposits, thereby constraining the degree of 
  flexibility available to banks, particularly in lowering the deposit rates (given the fear of loss of 
  deposits) in an easing phase of monetary policy. For four consecutive years between 2009-10 
  
  and 2012- 13, average deposit rates remained below the CPI inflation for those years, whereas 
  the annual return from gold and real estate exceeded CPI inflation most of the times, and by a 
  significant margin as well (Table IV.10). With the annual average consumer price inflation 
  touching double digits or staying just underneath for the last six years, bank deposits have been 
  yielding negative returns in real terms. 
  
  ii. Endogenous Liquidity Under the Monetary Policy Framework 
  
  IV.32 Under the extant monetary policy framework, financing of large fiscal deficits through 
  market borrowings has effectively resulted in the use of open market operations (OMO) 
  primarily to smoothen G-sec yields rather than being employed as a pure monetary policy tool, 
  contrary to cross-country practices which have increasingly favoured the separation of debt 
  management operations from liquidity management (Table IV.11). In India, on the other hand, 
  transmission has been impeded by: (a) not enforcing enough liquidity management discipline in 
  the banking system; and (b) allowing excessive indirect monetisation of the fiscal deficit which 
  also undermines the credibility of discretionary liquidity management operations. The LAF 
  framework allows banks complete freedom to access liquidity from the RBI at the repo rate, up 
  to their excess SLR holdings. The cost of holding excess SLR gets reflected in the pricing of 
  other assets. 
  
  Table IV.10: Nominal Return on Gold, Real Estate and Bank Deposits (Per cent, y-o-
  
  y) 
  
  Year 
  
  Return on 
  domestic 
  gold price 
  
  Return on real 
  
  estate (RBI's House 
  
  Price Index) 
  
  CPI-IW 
  Inflation 
  (Average) 
  
  Weighted avg. 
  term deposit 
  
  rates of 
  banks* 
  
  2004-05 
  2005-06 
  2006-07 
  2007-08 
  2008-09 
  2009-10 
  2010-11 
  2011-12 
  2012-13 
  Apr-Oct 2013 
  *: End-March @: Apr-Aug, 2013 $: Apr-Nov, 2013 ** 2013-14 q1 
  
  7.5 
  12.3 
  33.9 
  8.2 
  29.0 
  22.2 
  22.0 
  33.8 
  17.6 
  -5.4@ 
  
  3.8 
  4.4 
  6.7 
  6.2 
  9.1 
  12.4 
  10.4 
  8.4 
  10.4 
  10.9$ 
  
  - 
  
  - 
  - 
  - 
  - 
  
  11.7 
  19.1 
  22.3 
  22.7 
  0.9 ** 
  
  6.18 
  6.51 
  8.22 
  8.71 
  8.84 
  6.97 
  8.29 
  7.40 
  7.27 
  7.74 
  
  IV.33 As government market borrowing crowds out funds to the private sector, in turn placing 
  pressure on liquidity, the central bank is often forced to accommodate the resultant liquidity 
  shortages by providing additional liquidity through open market operations, especially via 
  outright purchases of G-secs. The net market borrowings of the central Government have 
  increased 10-fold in the eight years till 2012-13, even without counting for additional funding of 
  `1.16 trillion through 364-day treasury bills during the terminal year. Even in 2010-11, when 
  monetary policy needed to be tightened aggressively and efforts were being made in that 
  direction, large OMO purchases were effected. Reflecting these developments, OMO 
  
  Country  Arrangements 
  Indonesia Government debt securities (T-bills and 
  G-bonds) are issued by Ministry. Bank 
  Indonesia (BI) as the implementing 
  agency stipulates and administers the 
  regulations regarding the issuance, sale 
  and purchase of these instruments. 
  
  Chile  The International Finance Unit of the 
  
  Ministry of Finance is in charge of 
  proposing and implementing strategies 
  regarding public debt through the Public 
  Debt Office (PDO). The Central Bank of 
  Chile carries out monthly bond auctions on 
  dates published in a calendar in the amounts 
  established by the Finance Ministry. 
  Mexico  The Federal Government of Mexico, 
  
  transactions have largely become one-sided in recent years and have turned into a dominant 
  source of reserve money creation rather than a tool for managing liquidity mismatches (Chart 
  IV.5). While some expansion of reserve money consistent with the growth in broad money and 
  nominal GDP is necessary (as set out under Pillar II in Chapter III), excessive monetary 
  expansion at times results from indirect monetisation of the fiscal deficit through OMOs. 
  
  Table IV.11: Debt Management Arrangements: Cross-Country  
  
  Practices in Some Emerging Market Economies 
  Country  Arrangements 
  
  Brazil  The National Treasury Secretariat is an 
  
  agency of the National Treasury in charge 
  of management and administration of 
  domestic and external public debt. Most 
  of the domestic government debt is issued 
  through auctions held by National 
  Treasury, making public offerings to 
  financial institutions. 
  
  through the Ministry of Finance and Public 
  Credit, is responsible for management and 
  issuance of government securities. The 
  Bank of Mexico operates as the financial 
  agent for the Federal Government and 
  undertakes primary auctions of government 
  securities on a weekly basis. 
  
  Poland  The Republic of Poland, via the Ministry 
  
  Hungary The Hungarian Government issues 
  
  of Finance on behalf of State Treasury, 
  issued T-bills of upto one year and bonds 
  of upto 10 years to cover the budget 
  deficit. The National Bank of Poland 
  (NBP) can purchase T-bonds in the 
  secondary market only exceptionally, in 
  the case of a severe crisis, threatening 
  domestic financial stability. 
  
  Turkey  The Under Secretariat of the Treasury, 
  
  which is the issuer of G-bonds and T-bills, 
  is responsible for the method and terms of 
  issuance as well as debt management. On 
  behalf of the Under Secretariat, the 
  Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey 
  issues bonds and bills in accordance with 
  the financial services agreement with the 
  Treasury. The CBRT is the central 
  securities depository. 
  
  government bonds and discount T-bills, 
  which was shifted out of the central bank in 
  the late 1990s. The majority of government 
  securities  discount T-bills and G-bonds  
  are sold through public issues. 
  
  South 
  Africa 
  
  The management of debt is vested with the 
  National Treasury. The Treasury conducts 
  weekly bond auctions according to a 
  calendar published at the beginning of the 
  fiscal year. 
  
  IV.34 When the OMO cut-off yields in a given auction are lower than the cut-off yield in the 
  immediately following primary auction of G-secs (Chart IV.6, Table IV.12), it creates 
  opportunities for the banking system to profit from the RBIs liquidity management operations. 
  In 2012-13, in effect, 30 per cent of the net borrowing requirement of the Government was 
  supported through OMOs (Table IV.13). 
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
  Table IV.12: Comparison of Yields (OMOs versus Primary Auctions) 
  
  Auction Date 
  
  Weighted Average Cut off Yield (Per 
  
  May 11, 2012 
  May 18, 2012 
  
  cent) 
  
  OMO Auction 
  
  First primary auction 
  subsequent to OMO 
  
  8.51 
  8.54 
  
  8.66 
  8.60 
  
  May 25, 2012 
  June 12, 2012 
  June 22, 2012 
  December 4, 2012 
  December 11, 2012 
  December 21, 2012 
  December 28, 2012 
  February 15, 2013 
  May 7, 2013 
  June 7, 2013 
  July 18, 2013 
  August 23, 2013 
  August 30, 2013 
  October 7, 2013 
  November 18, 2013 
  
  8.51 
  8.25 
  8.36 
  8.24 
  8.23 
  8.19 
  8.17 
  7.93 
  7.82 
  7.47 
  8.45 
  8.67 
  9.09 
  8.61 
  8.67 
  
  8.62 
  8.36 
  8.36 
  8.22 
  8.22 
  8.19 
  8.19 
  7.92 
  7.60 
  7.40 
  8.34 
  8.90 
  9.15 
  8.74 
  8.99 
  
  Recommendations 
  
  IV.35 Accordingly, the Committee recommends that OMOs have to be detached from fiscal 
  operations and instead linked solely to liquidity management. OMOs should not be used for 
  managing yields on government securities. 
  
  IV.36 To sum up, there are several impediments that need to be taken on board for effective 
  monetary transmission, some of which can be addressed through steps taken by the Reserve 
  Bank itself. First and foremost, OMO purchases should be undertaken only when the liquidity 
  condition warrants them. Second, the Reserve Bank should continue its efforts to develop the 
  term repo market by calibrating liquidity at its overnight repo window as necessary. Third, the 
  Reserve Bank should avoid regulatory forbearance, especially by changing norms for portfolio 
  classification when yields rise. Fourth, it should facilitate a more competitive and dynamic 
  banking structure so that re-pricing of deposit and lending rates, in due course, becomes faster in 
  response to RBIs monetary policy actions.  
  
  Table IV.13: Indirect Monetisation Eases Crowding-out Pressures but affects  
  
  Year 
  
  Net Market 
  Borrowing 
  (NMB) (` 
  
  Transmission of Changes in Repo Rate 
  RBI Support 
  through Direct 
  Subscription and 
  
  Support as 
  per cent of 
  
  SCBs' 
  
  RBI 
  
  Support to 
  
  NMB (` 
  
  1 
  2000-01 
  2001-02 
  2002-03 
  2003-04 
  2004-05 
  2005-06 
  
  bn) 
  2 
  
  734 
  908 
  1041 
  889 
  509 
  1062 
  
  OMO* (` bn) 
  
  NMB 
  
  3 
  
  103 
  -16 
  -179 
  -205 
  -35 
  -39 
  
  4 
  14 
  -2 
  -17 
  -23 
  -7 
  -4 
  
  bn) 
  5 
  
  616 
  711 
  1122 
  1313 
  642 
  -182 
  
  SCBs' 
  
  Support as 
  per cent of 
  
  NMB 
  
  Total Support 
  from RBI and 
  SCBs as per 
  cent of NMB 
  
  6 
  84 
  78 
  108 
  148 
  126 
  -17 
  
  7=4+6 
  
  98 
  77 
  91 
  125 
  119 
  -21 
  
  2006-07 
  2007-08 
  2008-09 
  2009-10 
  2010-11 
  2011-12 
  2012-13 
  *: Direct Subscription discontinued with effect from April 2006. 
  
+ -51 
+ 59 
+ 945 
+ 755 
+ 672 
+ 1342 
+ 1545 
+ 
  1148 
  1306 
  2470 
  3944 
  3264 
  4841 
  5075 
- 
- -51 
- 59 
- 945 
- 755 
- 672 
- 1342 
- 1545 
  
  -4 
  5 
  38 
  19 
  21 
  28 
  30 
  
  753 
  1826 
  1971 
  2226 
  1188 
  2379 
  2686 
  
  66 
  140 
  80 
  56 
  36 
  49 
  53 
  
  61 
  144 
  118 
  76 
  57 
  77 
  83 
  
   
  
  1Against the backdrop of the recent financial crisis, some preliminary evidence suggests that the 
  damage to productive capacity in the US was an endogenous response to weak aggregate demand 
  (Reifschneider, D., W. L. Wascher and D. Wilcox, (2013): Aggregate Supply in the United 
  States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy, 14th 
  Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, IMF, Washington). 
  
  2Mishra, P. and P. Montiel (2012), How Effective is Monetary Transmission in Low Income 
  Countries? A Survey of Empirical Evidence, IMF Working Paper, No. WP/12/143, June. 
  
  3Bernanke, B., S. and A. S. Blinder (1992), The Federal Funds Rate and the Channel of 
  Monetary Transmission, The American Economic Review, 82(4): 901-21. 
  
  4Jain-Chandra, S. and D. F. Unsal (2012): The Effectiveness of Monetary Policy Transmission 
  Under Capital Inflows: Evidence from Asia, IMF Working Paper No. WP/12/265. 
  
  5gert, B. and R. MacDonald (2009): Monetary Transmission Mechanism in Central and 
  Eastern Europe: Surveying the Surveyable, Journal of Economic Surveys, 23(2): 277-327. 
  
  6Mohanty, M.S. and P. Turner (2008): Monetary Policy Transmission in Emerging Market 
  Economies: What is New?, BIS Policy Paper No.3, January. 
  
  7Gumata, N., A Kabundi and E. Ndou (2013): Important channels of transmission of monetary 
  policy shock in South Africa, ERSA Working Paper No. 375, Cape Town. 
  
  8Cicarelli, M., A. Maddaloni and J. L. Peydro (2010): Trusting the Bankers: A New Look at the 
  Credit Channel of Monetary Policy, ECB Working Paper No.1228 . 
  
  9Havrnek, T. and M. Rusnk (2012): Transmisson Lags in Monetary Policy: A Meta 
  Analysis, Czech National Bank Working Paper Series, No.10. 
  
  10Bogdanski, J., A. A. Tombini and S. R. C. Werlang (2000): Implementing Inflation Targeting 
  in Brazil, Working Paper Series No.1, Banco Central do Brasil. 
  
  11However, transmission lags in cross-country studies may not be strictly comparable as they 
  depend on the size and timing of the policy actions. 
  
  12Kapur, M. and H. Behera (2012): Monetary Transmission Mechanism in India: A Quarterly 
  Model, RBI Working Paper No. 9.  
  Khundrakpam, J. K. (2011): Credit Channel of Monetary Transmission in India - How Effective 
  and Long is the Lag?,RBI Working Paper No. 20. 
  Khundrakpam, J. K. and R. Jain (2012): Monetary Policy Transmission in India: A Peep Inside 
  the Black Box, RBI Working Paper No. 11.  
  Mohanty, D. (2012): Evidence on Interest Rate Channel of Monetary Policy Transmission in 
  India, RBI Working Paper No. 6. 
  Patra, M. D. and M. Kapur (2010): A monetary policy model without money for India, IMF 
  Working Paper No.10/183, International Monetary Fund. 
  Kletzer, K. (2012): Financial Frictions and Monetary Policy Transmission in India, The 
  Oxford Handbook of the Indian Economy, Ed. by Chetan Ghate Reserve Bank of India (2005): 
  Report on Currency and Finance, 2003-04. 
  Singh, B. (2011): How Asymmetric is the Monetary Policy Transmission to Financial Markets 
  in India?, RBI Occasional Papers, Vol.32/2. 
  
  13Following Singh (2011) and Mohanty (2012), Grangers causality across markets based on a 
  VAR framework was examined using monthly data from April 2001 to March 2013. Two blocks 
  were considered, viz., (i) policy variable  proxied by monthly average Call Money Rate (CMR) 
  and (ii) other financial market variables. The latter include yield on government securities with 
  residual maturity of 10-years and yield on the 5-year AAA rated corporate bonds representing 
  debt market, weighted average lending rate (WALR) indicating credit market, BSE Sensex 
  showing equity market, and Rupee per US dollar representing foreign exchange market. The test 
  was repeated by replacing 5-year AAA rated corporate bond by the yield of the 10-year AAA 
  rated corporate bonds and results were similar. 
  
  14  
  
  Pair-wise Granger Causality Tests; Sample: 1999Q2 2013Q1; Lags: 2 
  
  Null Hypothesis: 
  
  Non-Food Credit Growth does not Granger Cause Effective 
  Policy Rate 
  Effective Policy Rate does not Granger Cause Non-Food Credit 
  Growth 
  
  Obs. 
  
  F-
  Statistic 
  
  Prob. 
  
  54  0.17899  0.8367 
  
  54  3.96329  0.0254 
  
  15Recent work, i.e., Pandit and Vashisht (2011) #, Khundrakpam (2011) and Khundrakpam and 
  Jain (2012) also corroborated the existence of a robust and statistically significant credit channel 
  of monetary transmission in the post-LAF period. According to Khundrakpam (2011), a 100 
  basis points increase in policy rate reduced the annualised growth in nominal and real bank credit 
  by 2.78 per cent and 2.17 per cent, respectively. 
  
  #Pandit, B.L. and P. Vashisht (2011), Monetary Policy and Credit Demand in India and Some 
  EMEs, Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations, Working Paper 
  No.256. 
  
  16Ray, P., H. Joshi and M. Saggar (1998): New Monetary Transmission Channels: Role of 
  Interest Rate and Exchange Rate in the Conduct of Monetary Policy, Economic and Political 
  Weekly, 33(44), 2787-94. 
  
  17Khundrakpam, J. K. (2007): Economic reforms and exchange rate pass-through to domestic 
  prices in IndiaBIS Working Papers 225, Bank for International Settlements. 
  
  18Kapur, M. (2012): Inflation Forecasting: Issues and Challenges, RBI Working Paper No. 1. 
  
  19Kapur, M. and H. Behera (2012): Monetary Transmission Mechanism in India: A Quarterly 
  Model, RBI Working Paper No.9. 
  
  20Patra, M.D., and M. Kapur (2010), A monetary policy model without money for India, IMF 
  Working Paper No.10/183, International Monetary Fund. 
  
  21Patra, M.D., J.K. Khundrakpam, and A.T. George (2013): Post-Global Crisis Inflation 
  Dynamics in India What has Changed?, Paper presented at the India Policy Forum, July 16-17. 
  
  22Ghosh, A. and R. Rajan (2007): Macroeconomic Determinants of Exchange Rate Pass-
  Through in India, April. Available at SSRN: http://dx.doi. org/10.2139/ssrn.984332 
  
  23Bhattacharya, R., Patnaik, I., & Shah, A. (2008), Exchange rate pass-through in India, 
  Macro/Finance Group at NIPFP,[Online]. Available at: 
  http://macrofinance. nipfp. org. in/PDF/BPS2008_erpt. pdf. 
  
  24Singh, B. and S. Pattanaik (2012): Monetary Policy and Asset Price Interactions in India: 
  Should Financial Stability Concerns from Asset Prices be Addressed Through Monetary 
  Policy?, Journal of Economic Integration, Vol. 27,167-194. 
  
  25Singh, B. (2012): How important is the stock market wealth effect on consumption in India?, 
  Empirical Economics, 43(3), 915-927. 
  
  26Pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee on Comprehensive Review of National 
  Small Savings Fund (Report submitted in June 2011), the government announced in November 
  2011 the alignment of the rate of interest on small savings schemes with interest rates on 
  government securities of similar maturity with a spread of 25 basis points. It was also decided 
  that the notification of interest rate on small savings schemes for every financial year would be 
  before the year commenced. Nonetheless, some rigidities still remain in the interest rates on 
  small savings instruments. This is because the benchmark yield is an average of the month-end 
  yields of the previous financial year. Also the interest rate stays fixed for the year. These 
  rigidities continue to pose impediments to transmission. 
  
  27The ratio of outstanding agriculture loans to agriculture GDP increased from 9.5 per cent in the 
  1990s to 12.2 per cent in 2001-02, but subsequently rose sharply to 35.9 per cent in 2012-13. 
  
  28According to the World Bank Findex Survey (2012), only 35 per cent of Indian adults have 
  access to a formal bank account and 8 per cent borrowed formally in the last 12 months. Only 2 
  per cent of adults used an account to receive money from a family member living in another area 
  and 4 per cent used an account to receive payment from the Government. 
  
  29RBI (2013): Discussion Paper on Banking Structure in India - The Way Forward, available 
  on 
  http://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=29405 
  
  30Since deposit and lending rates may respond with different lags when the repo rate is changed, 
  and given that liquidity is only one of the many determinants of transmission, direct comparison 
  of deposit and lending rates relative to prevailing liquidity conditions may only provide broad 
  indications of the link between liquidity conditions and transmission. 
  
  31Ray, P. and E.Prabhu (2013), Financial Development and Monetary Policy Transmission 
  Across Financial Markets: What Do Daily Data tell for India?, RBI Working Paper,No. 4. 
  
   
  
  